1 0
1 1
© Québec Official Publisher Updated to November 1 2024
This document has official status.
chapter P-9
PARKS ACT
P1
A2D
Re
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Kc
Se
DIVISION I
m
INTERPRETATION............................................................................................ 1
b
e DIVISION II
r ESTABLISHMENT OF PARKS......................................................................... 2
3
DIVISION III
1
ADMINISTRATION........................................................................................... 5
,
DIVISION IV
1 REGULATIONS................................................................................................. 9
9
DIVISION V
7
PENAL PROVISIONS....................................................................................... 11
7
DIVISION VI
TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS................................................ 13
REPEAL SCHEDULE
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher P-9 / 1 of 9
PARKS
DIVISION I
INTERPRETATION
1. In this Act, unless the context indicates a different meaning,
(a) “Minister” means the Minister of Sustainable Development, Environment and Parks;
(b) “park” means a national park whose primary purpose is to ensure the conservation and permanent
protection of areas representative of the natural regions of Québec and of natural sites with outstanding
features, in particular because of their biological diversity, while providing the public with access to those
areas or sites for educational or cross-country recreation purposes;
(c) (paragraph repealed);
(d) (paragraph repealed);
(e) “cross-country recreation” means a type of recreation characterized by the use of little frequented
territory and the use of relatively simple equipment;
(f) (paragraph repealed).
1977, c. 56, s. 1; 1979, c. 77, s. 34; 1985, c. 30, s. 58; 1986, c. 109, s. 43; 1994, c. 17, s. 76; 1999, c. 36, s. 141; 2001, c. 63, s. 1; 2004,
c. 11, s. 46; 2006, c. 3, s. 35.
1.1. In this Act, “Société” means the Société des établissements de plein air du Québec, established under
section 1 of the Act respecting the Société des établissements de plein air du Québec (chapter S-13.01).
1999, c. 36, s. 142; 2004, c. 11, s. 47.
DIVISION II
ESTABLISHMENT OF PARKS
2. The Government, by regulation, may establish a park on any part of the lands in the domain of the State
it indicates.
1977, c. 56, s. 2; 1987, c. 23, s. 76; 1999, c. 40, s. 208; 2001, c. 63, s. 2.
2.1. The Minister may acquire by agreement or expropriation any property the Minister considers
necessary for the establishment of a park or for making changes in its boundaries.
For the same purposes, the Minister may also lease any building situated within or outside the boundaries
of a park.
1985, c. 30, s. 59; 2001, c. 63, s. 3; 2004, c. 11, s. 48.
3. (Repealed).
1977, c. 56, s. 3; 1985, c. 30, s. 60; 1986, c. 109, s. 44; 2001, c. 63, s. 4.
4. The Government may establish, abolish or change the boundaries of a park, if the Minister has
previously:
(a) given notice of his intention to establish, abolish or change the boundaries of the park in the Gazette
officielle du Québec and in one or two newspapers published in the region concerned, or, if no newspaper is
published in that region, in one or two newspapers published in the closest neighbouring region;
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher P-9 / 2 of 9
PARKS
(b) granted 60 days from the publication of such notice to enable interested persons to submit their
objections to him in writing;
(c) received in a public hearing the persons contemplated in paragraph b.
The public hearing provided for in paragraph c may be held by a person or body designated by the
Minister, such as the Bureau d’audiences publiques sur l’environnement, with the authorization of the
minister responsible for the administration of the Environment Quality Act (chapter Q-2).
The person or body designated to hold the public hearing shall, within the time prescribed in the mandate,
report his or its findings and analysis to the Minister.
The time limit for holding the public hearing and reporting to the Minister may not exceed 12 months.
The reports are made public by the Minister within 30 days after they are received.
If the Bureau d’audiences publiques sur l’environnement is designated, sections 6.3 to 6.6 of the
Environment Quality Act apply, with the necessary modifications.
1977, c. 56, s. 4; 1985, c. 30, s. 61; 1999, c. 40, s. 208; 2001, c. 63, s. 5; 22021, c. 1, s. 53.112
0 20
DIVISION III 2 20
1 12
ADMINISTRATION , ,1
c c,
5. No part of the lands forming a park may be sold or exc.hanged. .c
1 1.
1977, c. 56, s. 5.
1
,
5.1. The Minister has authority over the whole territory of a park and is responsible for its management.
s
.
The Société shall operate all parks situated south of the territories c overed by the Act respecting hunting
and fishing rights in the James Bay and New Québec territories (chapter5 D-13.1); for that purpose, the Société
shall exercise the powers and duties conferred on it by this Act, sub3j12ect to the rights and authorizations
granted to a third party by the Minister.
2004, c. 11, s. 49.
6. The Minister may authorize or carry out any work of maintenance, development or construction in a
park that may serve to maintain or improve the quality of the park. The Minister may also, subject to the
applicable legislative provisions, authorize or carry out such work outside the boundaries of a park insofar as
the work is necessary to the operations of the park.
In addition, the Minister may delegate, by contract, to the Kativik Regional Government or a municipality
constituted under the Act respecting Northern villages and the Kativik Regional Government (chapter V-6.1)
or under the Cree Villages and the Naskapi Village Act (chapter V-5.1), or to the Cree Nation Government
constituted under the Act respecting the Cree Nation Government (chapter G-1.031) or a Native community
represented by its band council, the power to carry out the work referred to in the first paragraph both within
and outside the boundaries of a park and in the latter case, subject to the applicable legislative provisions.
The Société may also carry out the work referred to in the first paragraph.
Every provision of law or of a regulation not inconsistent with this Act and the regulations applies in a
park.
1977, c. 56, s. 6; 1999, c. 36, s. 143; 2001, c. 63, s. 6; 2004, c. 11, s. 50; 2013, c. 19, s. 91.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher P-9 / 3 of 9
PARKS
6.1. Every person who enters a park or stays, travels or engages in an activity in a park must, in the cases
determined by regulation, hold an authorization issued for that purpose by the Minister or the Société or a
person designated by the Minister or the Société. The authorization shall be issued on payment of the fees
fixed in the regulation.
1995, c. 40, s. 1; 1999, c. 36, s. 144; 2004, c. 11, s. 51.
7. Notwithstanding any provision of law,
(a) hunting or trapping of every kind is prohibited in a park;
(b) all forms of prospecting, and any utilization, harvesting or harnessing of resources related to logging,
mining or the production of energy, and the laying of oil or gas pipelines or power lines, are prohibited within
the confines of a park.
Notwithstanding subparagraph b, the electric power transmission equipment, electric power control and
transformer stations and the telecommunications equipment required for the operation of a park may, at the
request of the Minister or the Société, be constructed, operated and maintained in a park.
Subparagraph b of the first paragraph does not apply to rights relating to electric power generating works
or equipment, electric power or communications transmission equipment or to control and transformer
stations already in existence, or to changes made to them with the authorization of the Minister.
1977, c. 56, s. 7; 1986, c. 109, s. 45; 1999, c. 36, s. 145; 2004, c. 11, s. 52.
8. No person may do other maintenance, development or construction work in or make changes to the
grounds of a park without prior authorization from the Minister pursuant to the first paragraph of section 6.
1977, c. 56, s. 8; 1985, c. 30, s. 62; 1999, c. 36, s. 146; 2004, c. 11, s. 53.
8.1. No person except the Société may operate a business, provide a service or organize an activity in a
park without priorly making a contract to that effect with the Minister or obtaining the Minister’s
authorization.
The contract may provide that all or part of the fees paid to enter a park or to stay, travel or engage in an
activity in a park devolve on the other contracting party; in the case of the Société, the fees devolve on the
Société.
1985, c. 30, s. 62; 1988, c. 39, s. 43; 1995, c. 40, s. 2; 1999, c. 36, s. 147; 2001, c. 63, s. 7; 2004, c. 11, s. 54.
8.1.1. The Minister may delegate, by contract, to the Kativik Regional Government or a municipality
constituted under the Act respecting Northern villages and the Kativik Regional Government (chapter V-6.1)
or under the Cree Villages and the Naskapi Village Act (chapter V-5.1), or to the Cree Nation Government
constituted under the Act respecting the Cree Nation Government (chapter G-1.031) or a Native community
represented by its band council, the power to operate a business, provide a service or organize an activity
necessary to the operations of a park, both within and outside the boundaries of the park and in the latter case,
subject to the applicable legislative provisions.
The contract may provide that all or part of the fees paid to enter a park or to stay, travel or engage in an
activity in a park devolve on the other contracting party.
2001, c. 63, s. 8; 2004, c. 11, s. 55; 2013, c. 19, s. 91.
8.2. The Minister may authorize a project contemplated in sections 8 and 8.1 to proceed, provided its
execution is compatible with continued conservation of the natural environment or preservation of the
recreational potential of the park.
1985, c. 30, s. 62; 1999, c. 36, s. 148; 2001, c. 63, s. 9; 2004, c. 11, s. 56.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher P-9 / 4 of 9
PARKS
DIVISION IV
REGULATIONS
9. The Government may make regulations, in respect of a park, to
(a) ensure the protection and conservation of the natural environment, or any specific element thereof;
(b) divide it into different zones;
(c) determine to what extent and for what purposes the public may be admitted;
(d) fix the conditions governing any person staying, travelling or engaging in an activity in a park;
(e) prohibit or regulate the possession and transport of arms, hunting gear or fishing tackle;
(f) prohibit or regulate the use of boats, aircraft or any type of vehicle, motorized or not;
(g) absolutely or partially prohibit fishing and determine the conditions on which fishing may be allowed;
(h) regulate the transportation and possession of animals or fish;
(i) prohibit or regulate the posting of bills;
(j) ensure that the park is kept clean and orderly and the persons enjoy peace and quiet;
(k) prohibit certain outdoor activities;
(l) fix the conditions for participation in outdoor activities;
(m) determine the cases where a person may be refused admittance or ejected;
(n) entrust the employees of the Société or the employees of the other party to a contract made under
section 8.1 or 8.1.1 with any power or duty connected with admissions or activities;
(o) prescribe the rules of procedure to be followed at public hearings, except if the Bureau d’audiences
publiques sur l’environnement is designated to hold such a hearing;
(p) determine which of the prescriptions of regulations made under this section entail penalties under
section 11.3 for their contravention.
1977, c. 56, s. 9; 1985, c. 30, s. 63; 1995, c. 40, s. 3; 2001, c. 63, s. 10; 22021, c. 1, s. 54.1
0
9.1. The Government may also, by regulation, 2
1
(a) determine the cases in which an authorization is re,quired to enter a park or to stay, travel or engage in
activities in a park and the fees payable to obtain such authcorization;
.
(b) exempt, in the cases it determines, any person or c1lass or group of persons it identifies from all or part
of the obligations imposed by section 6.1 or those prescribed in the regulation, on the basis, in particular, of a
person’s age;
(c) confer on the employees of the Minister or the Société or the other party to a contract made under
section 8.1 or 8.1.1 any power or duty relating to the carrying out of section 6.1 and of the regulations made
under this section;
(d) determine the obligations of persons who enter a park or stay, travel or engage in an activity in a park;
Updated to 1November 01 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher P-9 / 5 of 9
PARKS
(e) determine which of the provisions of a regulation made under this section entail penalties under
section 11.3 for their contravention.
The fees prescribed in subparagraph a of the first paragraph may vary according to the persons or classes
or groups of persons which the Government may determine, in particular, on the basis of a person’s age.
The fees may also vary according to the times of the year or of the day determined by the Government at
which persons enter the park, or stay, travel or engage in an activity in the park and, in the case of fishing,
according to whether they hold a fishing licence for resident or for non-resident and according to the species
to be fished.
Finally, the fees may vary according to the places frequented or the means used to enter or travel in such
places, namely, on foot, in a vehicle or by boat or aircraft and, in the latter three cases, according to the type
of vehicle, boat or aircraft or according to whether they are motorized or not.
1995, c. 40, s. 4; 1999, c. 36, s. 149; 2001, c. 63, s. 11; 2004, c. 11, s. 57.
10. (Repealed).
1977, c. 56, s. 10; 1995, c. 40, s. 5.
DIVISION V
PENAL PROVISIONS
1992, c. 61, s. 427.
11. Every person who infringes subparagraph a of the first paragraph of section 7 in respect of big game
within the meaning of the Act respecting the conservation and development of wildlife (chapter C-61.1) is
liable to a fine of $2,500 to $12,500 for a first offence and to a fine of $7,500 to $37,500 for any subsequent
offence within five years of conviction for an offence under that provision in respect of big game.
The judge may, in addition to sentencing the offender to payment of a fine, sentence him to imprisonment
for a term of not more than one year, despite article 231 of the Code of Penal Procedure (chapter C-25.1).
1977, c. 56, s. 11; 1985, c. 30, s. 64; 1986, c. 58, s. 68; 1986, c. 109, s. 53; 1986, c. 109, s. 46; 1990, c. 4, s. 622; 1991, c. 33, s. 89; 2
2021, c. 24, s. 114.1 0
2
11.1. Every person who infringes subparagraph a of the first paragraph of section 7 in respect of animals1
other than big game within the meaning of the Act respecting the conservation and development of wildlife,
(chapter C-61.1) is liable to a fine of $1,000 to $5,000 for a first offence and to a fine of $3,000 to $15,000 forc
any subsequent offence within five years of conviction for an offence under that provision in respect of.
animals other than big game. 2
4
The judge may, in addition to sentencing the offender to payment of a fine, sentence him to imprisonment
for a term of not more than three months, despite article 231 of the Code of Penal Procedure (chapter C-25.1).
1985, c. 30, s. 64; 1986, c. 109, s. 47; 1990, c. 4, s. 623; 1991, c. 33, s. 90; 22021, c. 24, s. 114.1
0
11.2. Every person who infringes subparagraph b of the f2irst paragraph of section 7 or section 8 or 8.1 is
liable to a fine of $500 to $25,000. 1
,
1985, c. 30, s. 64; 1986, c. 109, s. 48; 1990, c. 4, s. 624; 1991, c. 33, s. 91; 2c2021, c. 24, s. 115.1
.0
22
41
,
c
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
.
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher P-9 / 6 of 9
2
4
PARKS
11.3. Every person who infringes section 6.1 or any regulation the contravention of which is an offence
under paragraph p of section 9 or under subparagraph e of the first paragraph of section 9.1 is liable to a fine
of $125 to $3,125.
1985, c. 30, s. 64; 1986, c. 109, s. 49; 1990, c. 4, s. 624; 1991, c. 33, s. 92; 1995, c. 40, s. 6; 22021, c. 24, s. 116.1
0
11.4. Any conviction for an offence under a provision of subparagraph a2 of the first paragraph of section 7
entails the confiscation of the thing seized. 1
,
Upon pronouncing a conviction for an offence under a provision of subpcaragraph b of the first paragraph of
section 7, section 8 or 8.1 or a provision of any regulation the contraventi.on of which constitutes an offence
under paragraph p of section 9, a judge may, on the application of the prose2cutor, order the confiscation of the
thing seized. However, where fish is seized, the conviction entails the confi4scation thereof.
Prior notice of the application for confiscation shall be given by the prosecutor to the person from whom
the thing was seized or to the offender, except where they are in the presence of the judge.
1985, c. 30, s. 64; 1992, c. 61, s. 428.
11.5. Every person who, by act or omission, aids another person to commit an offence is guilty of the
offence as if he had committed it himself, if he knew or should have known that his act or omission would
probably lead to aiding the commission of the offence.
Every person who, by encouragement, advice or order, induces another person to commit an offence is
guilty of the offence and of any other offence committed by the other person as a result of the encouragement,
advice or order, if he knew or should have known that they would probably lead to the commission of the
offence.
1985, c. 30, s. 64.
11.6. Any conviction for an offence committed in contravention of subparagraph a of the first paragraph of
section 7 may entail, as the judge decides, the suspension of every certificate or hunting or trapping licence
held by the offender or, as the case may be, a prohibition against applying therefor for a period of not more
than 24 months from the date of conviction.
Prior notice of the application for suspension shall be given to the offender by the prosecutor, except where
the parties are in the presence of the judge.
In the case of big game, any conviction for an offence committed in contravention of subparagraph a of the
first paragraph of section 7 entails of right the cancellation of every certificate or hunting or trapping licence
held by the offender or, as the case may be, a prohibition against applying therefor for a period of 24 months
from the date of conviction.
In the case of a subsequent offence in respect of the same class of animals, either big game or animals
other than big game, within 3 years of the previous conviction, the period of suspension, cancellation or
prohibition shall be twice the period provided in this section.
In the case of a third offence in respect of the same class of animals within 3 years of the first conviction,
the period of suspension, cancellation or prohibition shall be three times the period provided in this section.
1985, c. 30, s. 64; 1986, c. 109, s. 50; 1992, c. 61, s. 429.
11.7. The hunting or trapping licence or, as the case may be, the hunting or trapping certificate of a person
convicted for an offence committed in contravention of subparagraph a of the first paragraph of section 7
while his permit or, as the case may be, his certificate is already cancelled or suspended shall be, as the case
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher P-9 / 7 of 9
PARKS
may be, cancelled of right or, notwithstanding the first paragraph of section 11.6, suspended of right for an
additional period of 24 months subsequent to the first cancellation or suspension.
Every person prohibited from holding a certificate or a hunting or trapping licence who is convicted of an
offence under subparagraph a of the first paragraph of section 7 while the prohibition is in effect shall be
prohibited from applying for such a certificate or licence for an additional period of 24 months subsequent to
the first period of prohibition.
1985, c. 30, s. 64; 1986, c. 109, s. 51.
11.8. Sections 175 and 176 of the Act respecting the conservation and development of wildlife (chapter
C-61.1) apply in the case of a cancellation or suspension of permit or certificate effected under this Act.
1985, c. 30, s. 64.
12. (Repealed).
1977, c. 56, s. 12; 1990, c. 4, s. 625.
DIVISION VI
TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
13. (Repealed).
1977, c. 56, s. 13; 1979, c. 59, s. 1; 2001, c. 63, s. 12.
14. (Repealed).
1977, c. 56, s. 14; 1979, c. 59, s. 1; 2001, c. 63, s. 12.
15. The wildlife protection officer within the meaning of the Act respecting the conservation and
development of wildlife (chapter C-61.1) is empowered to see to the enforcement of this Act and the
regulations thereunder and he shall have, for the purposes of this Act, the powers of a peace officer.
1977, c. 56, s. 16; 1983, c. 39, s. 195; 2000, c. 48, s. 36; 2009, c. 49, s. 45.
15.1. (Repealed).
1999, c. 36, s. 150; 2000, c. 8, s. 242; 2004, c. 11, s. 58.
16. The Minister of Sustainable Development, Environment and Parks is entrusted with the application of
this Act.
1977, c. 56, s. 17; 2004, c. 11, s. 59; 2006, c. 3, s. 35.
17. (This section ceased to have effect on 17 April 1987).
1982, c. 21, s. 1; U. K., 1982, c. 11, Sch. B, Part I, s. 33.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher P-9 / 8 of 9
PARKS
REPEAL SCHEDULE
In accordance with section 17 of the Act respecting the consolidation of the statutes (chapter R-3), chapter 56
of the statutes of 1977, in force on 31 December 1977, is repealed, except section 18, effective from the
coming into force of chapter P-9 of the Revised Statutes.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher P-9 / 9 of 9