1 0
1 1
© Québec Official Publisher Updated to November 1 2024
This document has official status.
chapter T-12
TRANSPORT ACT
T1
R2D
Ae
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Nc
Se
DIVISION I
Pm
DEFINITIONS.................................................................................................... 1
Ob
Re DIVISION II
Tr SCOPE................................................................................................................ 2
A3
DIVISION III
C1
POWERS AND REGULATIONS...................................................................... 3
T,
DIVISION IV Repealed, 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
1
DIVISION V
9
COMMISSION DES TRANSPORTS
7
7 § 1. — Constitution of the Commission................................................................ 14
§ 2. — Functions and powers of the Commission................................................. 31
§ 2.1. — Mediation................................................................................................ 35.2
§ 3. — Permits....................................................................................................... 36
§ 4. — Tariffs......................................................................................................... 46
§ 4.1. — Forest transport contracts...................................................................... 47.1
§ 4.2. — Bulk trucking register............................................................................. 47.9
§ 4.3. — Brokerage services................................................................................. 47.13.1
§ 4.4. — Arbitration.............................................................................................. 47.18
§ 5. — Procedure.................................................................................................. 48
DIVISION V.1
REGIONAL ASSOCIATION OF TRUCKERS SUBSCRIBING TO A
BROKERAGE SERVICE................................................................................... 48.2
DIVISION V.1.1 Repealed, 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
DIVISION V.2
TRANSPORTATION OF STUDENTS.............................................................. 48.12
DIVISION V.3
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC TRANSIT SERVICE
§ 1. — Organization and management................................................................. 48.18
§ 2. — Inspection.................................................................................................. 48.36.1
§ 3. — Regulatory and penal provisions............................................................... 48.36.4
§ 4. — Other provisions........................................................................................ 48.37
DIVISION V.4
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC TRANSIT SERVICE FOR HANDICAPPED
PERSONS........................................................................................................... 48.39
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 1 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
DIVISION VI
INQUIRIES AND INSPECTIONS..................................................................... 49
DIVISION VII
PROCEEDING BEFORE THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL OF
QUÉBEC............................................................................................................. 51
DIVISION VIII
PENAL PROVISIONS....................................................................................... 73
DIVISION IX
INTERRUPTION OF TRANSPORT SERVICES.............................................. 81
DIVISION IX.1
FINANCING OF CERTAIN PUBLIC TRANSIT SERVICES.......................... 88.1
DIVISION IX.2 Repealed, 2016, c. 8, s. 117.
DIVISION IX.3
INVESTMENT IN SHARED TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE..... 88.10
DIVISION X
FINAL PROVISIONS........................................................................................ 89
SCHEDULE A
REPEAL SCHEDULES
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 2 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
DIVISION I
DEFINITIONS
1. In this Act, unless the context indicates a different meaning, the following expressions and words mean:
(a) “means of transport” : anything used for conveyance from one place to another, except the broadcast,
transmission and reception of sound, pictures, signs, signals, data or messages by wire, cable, waves or any
electrical, electronic, magnetic, electromagnetic or optical means;
(b) “vehicle” : any means of transport which, most frequently, is self-propelled;
(c) “transport system” : a system consisting of vehicles or other means of transport;
(d) “carrier” : any person who:
i. directly or through a third person transports any person or thing by a means of transport or a transport
system;
ii. (paragraph repealed);
iii. deals in transport brokerage; or
iv. leases vehicles;
(e) “regulation” : a regulation made under this Act by the Government;
(f) “Minister” : the Minister of Transport;
(g) (subparagraph repealed);
(h) “Commission” : the Commission des transports du Québec constituted by section 14;
(i) “explosive” : any explosive to which the Act respecting explosives (chapter E-22) applies;
(j) “dangerous substance” : any substance other than an explosive, designated as such by regulation;
(k) “public hearing” : a public hearing of the Commission held at a sitting to which persons are convoked;
(l) (subparagraph repealed).
Within the meaning of this Act and except where the Commission acts under the Act respecting owners,
operators and drivers of heavy vehicles (chapter P-30.3), a means of transport is deemed to be owned by a
carrier not only when he is the owner thereof but also when he is the lessee, trustee, liquidator, sequestrator or
syndic thereof.
For the purposes of this Act, transport brokerage refers to the activities of a person acting as a broker on
behalf of an operator of heavy vehicles registered in the bulk trucking register.
1972, c. 55, s. 1; 1974, c. 61, s. 1; 1975, c. 45, s. 1; 1977, c. 5, s. 14; 1981, c. 8, s. 1; 1986, c. 67, s. 1; 1987, c. 97, s. 98; 1988, c. 67, s.
1; 1994, c. 14, s. 31; 1997, c. 43, s. 790; 1998, c. 40, s. 154; 1999, c. 82, s. 1; 2005, c. 39, s. 52.
DIVISION II
SCOPE
2. This Act shall apply within the jurisdiction of Québec to:
Updated to 1November 01 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 3 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
(a) vehicles and other means of transport or transport systems, especially those governed by the Highway
Safety Code (chapter C-24.2), which are used, travel or are intended to travel within the territorial boundaries
of Québec, except ships or aircraft;
(b) the transport of persons, animals and things by land, air or water from one place to another within the
territorial boundaries of Québec by means of vehicles contemplated in paragraph a, or by ship or aircraft,
except navigation;
(c) transport by rail to which the Railway Act (chapter C-14.1) applies;
(d) transport brokerage and the leasing of vehicles.
It shall not apply to remunerated passenger transportation by automobile, except to the extent provided for
in the Act respecting remunerated passenger transportation by automobile (chapter T-11.2).
1972, c. 55, s. 2; 1975, c. 45, s. 2; 1981, c. 7, s. 536; 1983, c. 46, s. 108; 1986, c. 91, s. 655; 1987, c. 97, s. 99; 1988, c. 67, s. 2; 1991,
c. 59, s. 1; 1998, c. 40, s. 155; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 22019, c. 18, s. 2661.
0
DIVISION III 1
9
POWERS AND REGULATIONS ,
c
3. The Minister must prepare a plan .of transport systems in Québec, list the transport costs, tariffs and,
subject to the approval of the Governm1ent take steps to improve them while coordinating and integrating
them. 8
1972, c. 55, s. 3; 1998, c. 8, s. 13.
4. The Minister may grant subsidies for transport purposes.
He may also cause a person designated by him to examine the use made of the subsidies he pays and the
nature of the expenses connected with those subsidies.
He may withhold, cancel or reduce the amount of all or part of the subsidies of a recipient who does not
comply with a requirement or a condition established for the granting of subsidies.
1972, c. 55, s. 4; 1981, c. 26, s. 1; 1986, c. 67, s. 2; 1989, c. 20, s. 6.
4.1. The Minister may, by order, require any carrier to file an operating report with him, within the time he
determines and on the form he prescribes.
The order has effect from the date of its publication in the Gazette officielle du Québec.
1985, c. 35, s. 60.
Not in force
4.1.1. The Minister may, by way of an order taking effect on the date of its publication in the Gazette
officielle du Québec, require the persons designated by the Minister from among persons filing a first
application for registration, or registered for less than 30 days and for the first time, in the register of operators
or the register of owners of heavy vehicles established under the Act respecting owners, operators and drivers
of heavy vehicles (chapter P-30.3) to demonstrate to the Minister, within the time the Minister indicates, the
expertise or means available to them to implement in their businesses administrative measures capable of
reasonably ensuring the safety of road users on roads open to public vehicular traffic and preserving the
integrity of the road network.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 4 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
The Minister shall request the Commission to make an inquiry, in accordance with the Act respecting
owners, operators and drivers of heavy vehicles, if a person subject to an order has not demonstrated the
required expertise or means within the prescribed time, or if the demonstration made is unsatisfactory to the
Minister. Before making the request to the Commission, the Minister must invite the person to take a
professional knowledge test that will allow the person’s expertise to be demonstrated objectively. The
Minister may designate a person by agreement or contract to prepare and administer tests for the purposes of
this section.
2000, c. 35, s. 1; 2005, c. 39, s. 52.
4.2. The Minister may, by order, authorize a carrier to add safety equipment not regulated under paragraph
a of section 5 to a road vehicle used for the transportation of schoolchildren.
The order shall indicate the period and conditions of use of the safety equipment. The order takes effect
from the date of its publication in the Gazette officielle du Québec.
1995, c. 52, s. 1.
5. In addition to the other regulatory powers conferred upon it by this Act, the Government may, by
regulation,
(a) establish standards, conditions or modes of construction, use, safe-keeping, upkeep, ownership,
possession, rent, hygiene or safety of any means of transport or transport system which it indicates;
Not in force
(a.1) determine which of the provisions of a regulation relating to the transportation of schoolchildren
made under paragraph a constitute an offence and indicate, for each offence, the minimum and maximum
amounts of the fine to which the offender is liable, which shall be from $100 to $300, from $400 to $1,200 or
from $800 to $2,400, depending on the seriousness of the offence;
(b) establish and delimit territorial divisions, or authorize the Commission to establish and delimit such
divisions in the cases and on the conditions it determines;
(c) determine what activities require a permit for the transport of persons, provide exceptions to the
activities requiring a permit as regards types of persons transported, kinds of carriers, and, where such is the
case, as regards the place of the main establishment of such carrier, the kinds of services, the means of
transport or transport systems used and the territory or distance covered, and prescribe conditions for the
carrying on of such an activity or the availing of such an exception and fix the duration of such exception;
(d) determine the nature and classes of permits, establish standards permitting the determination of the
minimum and maximum number of permits, and prescribe the conditions on which a permit may be issued
and those on which a person may hold a permit and provide for exceptions to those conditions;
(e) prescribe conditions for the maintaining, assignment or transfer of a permit where there is a transfer of
ownership or change of control of a means of transport or a transport system, or an acquisition contemplated
in section 44;
(f) determine the minimum or maximum term of a permit, prescribe that a permit is not renewable,
exempt a permit from the renewal procedure provided in section 37.1, prescribe the conditions on which a
permit may be renewed or reinstated and determine the cases where a permit may be renewed by the
administrator of the Commission;
(g) fix the requirements applicable to the management and financing of means of transport or transport
systems, the equipment of carriers, the exchange of equipment and the establishment or change of lines or
routes of carriers;
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 5 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
(g.1) establish the conditions for the issue and renewal of a certificate of competence to drive a bus or
minibus used for the transportation of schoolchildren or to drive a vehicle used for the transportation of
schoolchildren, prescribe the information to be contained in the certificate of competence and authorize a
person to issue or renew it, to determine the content of the training course needed to obtain or renew it, to
dispense that course and to determine the fees payable for it;
(h) (paragraph repealed);
(i) specify the information contained in a contract which, despite compulsory filing, is not accessible
except in the manner and to the extent provided for in the Act respecting Access to documents held by public
bodies and the Protection of personal information (chapter A-2.1);
(j) grant exemption from payment for a transport service to such persons as it determines;
(k) adopt tariffs of fees and prescribe annual dues or other duties payable to the Commission and
determine the deposits that may be required and the conditions of their return or confiscation;
(l) (paragraph repealed);
(m) (paragraph repealed);
(n) determine the requirements applicable to estimates, contracts, bills of lading and shipping documents
in the case of a carrier or any person to whom the Act respecting owners, operators and drivers of heavy
vehicles (chapter P-30.3) applies;
(n.1) determine the conditions that an operator of heavy vehicles whose establishments are situated
outside Québec must satisfy to be registered in the bulk trucking register;
(n.2) determine the reasons for which the Commission may grant time to enable an operator to remedy a
situation that would entail the removal of the operator from the register;
(o) determine the duties, powers, rights and obligations of holders of brokerage permits and of operators
registered in the register in relation to brokerage service;
(o.1) prescribe standards of representativeness applicable to holders of brokerage permits;
(o.2) prescribe administrative, financing and management standards applicable to brokerage companies,
especially with respect to the compulsory content of their by-laws, the production of budget estimates and
audited financial statements and the qualifications required to hold the office of director;
(p) (paragraph repealed);
(q) prescribe the necessary forms for the administration of this Act;
(r) determine, among the provisions of a regulation under this section, those the violation of which
constitutes an offence and prescribe for each offence the minimum and maximum amounts to which the
offender is liable, namely from $125 to $375, $250 to $750 or $500 to $1,500, according to the seriousness of
the offence and, where applicable, whether the offender is an owner or operator of heavy vehicles, a transport
service intermediary, a carrier, a driver or a broker;
(s) determine the offences under this Act or a regulation thereunder for which a 72-hour notice may be
issued.
1972, c. 55, s. 5; 1974, c. 61, s. 2; 1975, c. 45, s. 3; 1981, c. 8, s. 2; 1981, c. 26, s. 2; 1983, c. 46, s. 109; 1985, c. 35, s. 61; 1986, c. 67,
s. 3; 1986, c. 92, s. 1; 1987, c. 97, s. 100; 1988, c. 67, s. 3; 1991, c. 59, s. 2; 1993, c. 24, s. 1; 1995, c. 52, s. 2; 1997, c. 43, s. 791;
1998, c. 8, s. 1; 1998, c. 40, s. 156; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 1999, c. 82, s. 2; 2005, c. 39, s. 52; 2011, c. 9, s. 1; 2015, c. 16, s. 15.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 6 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
5.1. The Government may, by regulation under this Act, confer discretionary powers on the Commission
for the issue, renewal, reinstatement or transfer of permits.
For such purpose, the Government may, where required, determine the principles, criteria or factors to be
taken into account by the Commission in these matters.
1986, c. 92, s. 2; 1993, c. 24, s. 2.
6. (Repealed).
1975, c. 45, s. 4; 1981, c. 26, s. 3; 1983, c. 46, s. 110; 1986, c. 95, s. 319.
7. (Repealed).
1975, c. 45, s. 4; 1986, c. 95, s. 319.
8. Every by-law concerning transport brokerage services under a government contract, adopted by a
brokerage permit holder must be approved by the Minister before coming into force.
The Government, by regulation, may generally or specially transfer the exercise, in whole or in part, of its
power of approval under the first paragraph to the Commission.
The Minister or the Commission, as the case may be, may approve all or part of a by-law referred to in the
first paragraph or withdraw approval given to all or part of a by-law. In the latter case, the by-law or part of
the by-law from which approval is withdrawn ceases to have effect on the date fixed in the notice of
withdrawal of approval published in the Gazette officielle du Québec.
1975, c. 45, s. 34 (part); 1981, c. 8, s. 3; 1983, c. 46, s. 111; 1986, c. 67, s. 4; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 1999, c. 82, s. 3; 2011, c. 9, s. 2.
8.1. The Government, by order, may suspend in whole or in part, for exceptional events, for such period
and in respect of such categories of carriers as it may indicate, the application of a regulation or order, and
determine the conditions to be met by a carrier to carry on the activities governed by the regulation or order
concerned.
Every carrier shall observe the conditions established by the Government.
1984, c. 23, s. 21.
DIVISION IV
Repealed, 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
9. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 6; 1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
9.1. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
9.2. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 7 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
9.3. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
9.4. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
9.5. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
9.6. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
9.7. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
9.8. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
9.9. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
10. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 7; 1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
10.1. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
11. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 8; 1978, c. 15, s. 140; 1983, c. 55, s. 161; 1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
11.1. (Repealed).
1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
12. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 9; 1985, c. 35, s. 62; 1997, c. 83, s. 28.
13. (Replaced).
1972, c. 55, s. 10; 1985, c. 35, s. 62.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 8 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
DIVISION V
COMMISSION DES TRANSPORTS
§ 1. — Constitution of the Commission
14. A body is constituted under the name of “Commission des transports du Québec”.
1972, c. 55, s. 11; 1977, c. 5, s. 14.
15. The head office of the Commission shall be within the territory of Ville de Québec.
It shall have an office within the territory of Ville de Montréal and at any other place determined by the
Government.
It may sit at any place in Québec.
The Commission may also hold public hearings in conjunction with any commission, council, board,
bureau or other body or person vested under an Act of a province, the Parliament of Canada, another country,
or a state or province of another country, the power to control or regulate the operation of a means of transport
or a transport system. Such joint public hearings may be held outside Québec.
1972, c. 55, s. 12; 1975, c. 45, s. 5; 1977, c. 5, s. 14; 2000, c. 56, s. 219, s. 220.
16. The Commission consists of not more than 11 members, including a president and two vice-presidents,
appointed for a term of not over five years by the Government, which shall fix their salaries and their other
conditions of employment.
A member may, with the permission of the president, continue the examination of an application referred
to him and render a decision despite the expiry of his term.
1972, c. 55, s. 13; 1975, c. 45, s. 6; 1981, c. 8, s. 4; 1987, c. 97, s. 101; 2001, c. 27, s. 1; 22022, c. 13, s. 85.11
0
16.0.1. Notwithstanding section 16, the Government may, where 2it considers that the dispatch of the
business of the Commission so requires, appoint any additional mem2ber for the time it determines; the
Government shall fix the member’s salary and, if applicable, the ,member’s additional salary, fees or
allowances. c
.
2001, c. 27, s. 2.
1
3
16.1. One of the vice-presidents shall be appointed to the head office and the other, to the office situated in
the territory of Ville de Montréal.
1981, c. 8, s. 4; 2000, c. 56, s. 219.
17. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 14; 1973, c. 37, s. 2; 1974, c. 61, s. 3; 1975, c. 45, s. 7; 1981, c. 8, s. 5; 1997, c. 43, s. 792.
17.1. The quorum of the Commission is five members including the president, who may designate a
member to replace him.
However, an individual decision may be made by a member acting alone and a review decision may be
made by three members.
1981, c. 8, s. 5; 1987, c. 97, s. 102; 1997, c. 43, s. 793.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 9 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
17.2. Every interested person may apply to the Commission for a review of any decision rendered by the
Commission in respect of which no proceeding has been brought before the Administrative Tribunal of
Québec
(1) to present a new fact which, if it had been known in due time, might have justified a different
decision;
(2) where, being a party to the issue, he was, for reasons considered sufficient, unable to present
observations;
(3) where a substantial or procedural defect is likely to invalidate the decision.
A decision containing an error in writing or in calculation or any other clerical error may be corrected by
the Commission.
1981, c. 8, s. 5; 1986, c. 95, s. 320; 1997, c. 43, s. 794; 1998, c. 40, s. 157.
17.3. An application for a review must give the reasons therefor and be notified to the Commission within
30 days after the date the decision has taken effect.
1981, c. 8, s. 5; 1986, c. 95, s. 321; 1987, c. 97, s. 103; 1997, c. 43, s. 795.
17.4. Where the Commission gives leave for review of a decision, the leave therefor suspends the
execution of the decision, unless the Commission decides otherwise in cases of special urgency.
1981, c. 8, s. 5; 1997, c. 43, s. 796.
17.5. (Repealed).
1981, c. 8, s. 5; 1997, c. 43, s. 797.
17.6. If the president or a member of the Commission is absent or unable to act, the Government may
appoint another person to replace him temporarily and fix his salary.
1981, c. 8, s. 5; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
17.7. During his vacation, the president is replaced by the vice-president designated by him; in no case
does such a designation entail any additional salary.
1981, c. 8, s. 5.
17.8. The Minister may, after consultation with the president, designate, for such period as he may
determine, a person referred to in section 19 to decide, where there is no opposition, an application.
Where an application cannot be granted, it must be referred to a member of the Commission who shall
decide it.
1984, c. 23, s. 22; 1986, c. 95, s. 322; 1987, c. 97, s. 104; 1995, c. 52, s. 3; 1997, c. 43, s. 798.
17.9. A decision rendered by a person designated by the Minister under section 17.8 is a decision of the
Commission which may be reviewed on the same grounds and in the same manner as any other decision.
1984, c. 23, s. 22; 1986, c. 95, s. 323.
18. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 15; 1981, c. 26, s. 4; 1981, c. 7, s. 536; 1986, c. 67, s. 5; 1987, c. 97, s. 105.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 10 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
19. The administrator of the Commission, the secretary, the inquiry commissioners, the investigators and
the other members of the personnel of the Commission are appointed in accordance with the Public Service
Act (chapter F-3.1.1).
However, the president of the Commission shall exercise in this respect the powers granted by such Act to
the chief executive officer of an agency.
1972, c. 55, s. 16; 1978, c. 15, s. 133, s. 140; 1981, c. 8, s. 6; 1983, c. 55, s. 161; 2000, c. 8, s. 242.
20. The members of the Commission shall carry on their duties full time.
1972, c. 55, s. 17; 1981, c. 8, s. 7.
21. No member of the Commission shall, under penalty of forfeiture of his office, have a direct or indirect
interest in an undertaking that may put his personal interest in conflict with that of the Commission.
Such forfeiture, however, shall not take place if such interest devolves to him by succession or gift,
provided that he renounces or disposes of it with all possible dispatch.
1972, c. 55, s. 18.
22. Decisions of the Commission must be rendered with dispatch, in writing, and state the reasons on
which they are based; they shall form part of the records of the Commission.
The Commission shall send forthwith, to the parties and to the Minister, a certified copy of every decision
rendered; it shall also send to the Minister, at his request, copy of any other document relevant to any matter.
1972, c. 55, s. 19; 1975, c. 45, s. 8; 1981, c. 8, s. 8; 1986, c. 95, s. 324.
23. A decision of the Commission has effect from the date it is signed or from any later date indicated
therein.
1972, c. 55, s. 20; 1974, c. 61, s. 4; 1975, c. 45, s. 9; 1981, c. 8, s. 9; 1981, c. 26, s. 5; 1983, c. 46, s. 112; 1987, c. 97, s. 106.
24. Minutes of the Commission which are approved by the Commission and certified by the president, a
member or, to the extent determined by regulation, an officer of the Commission, are authentic. The same
applies to documents or copies emanating from the Commission or forming part of its records, except permit
certificates.
1972, c. 55, s. 21; 1973, c. 37, s. 1; 1975, c. 45, s. 10; 1997, c. 43, s. 799.
24.1. An act, document or writing is binding on the Commission or may be attributed to it only if it is
signed by the president or by a member or an officer of the Commission and, in the latter cases, only to the
extent determined by regulation of the Commission.
2001, c. 27, s. 3.
25. The president shall be responsible for the administration of the Commission within the scope of its by-
laws.
The members of the Commission are in that respect subject to the supervision, orders and control of the
president of the Commission.
The president may prescribe the forms to be used at the Commission, unless they are prescribed by
regulation; such forms shall become official only upon publication in the Gazette officielle du Québec.
1972, c. 55, s. 22; 1975, c. 45, s. 11; 1988, c. 21, s. 66; 1997, c. 43, s. 800.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 11 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
26. The members of the Commission and the other officers and employees of the Commission cannot be
sued by reason of official acts done in good faith in the exercise of their functions.
1972, c. 55, s. 23.
27. Except on a question of jurisdiction, no application for judicial review under the Code of Civil
Procedure (chapter C-25.01) may be exercised and no injunction may be granted against the Commission or
against any of its members acting in their official capacity.
A judge of the Court of Appeal may, on an application, annul by a summary proceeding any proceeding
brought or decision rendered contrary to the first paragraph.
1972, c. 55, s. 24; 1979, c. 37, s. 43; 1997, c. 43, s. 801; I.N. 2016-01-01 (NCCP).
28. The sums derived from the payment of duties and costs shall be paid by the Commission into the
Consolidated Revenue Fund.
The fiscal year of the Commission shall end on 31 March each year.
1972, c. 55, s. 25; 1997, c. 43, s. 802.
29. The Commission shall, not later than 30 June each year, submit to the Minister a report of its activities
for the preceding fiscal year. The Minister shall lay such report before the National Assembly within thirty
days of its receipt if in session or, if not, within ten days of the opening of the next session.
1972, c. 55, s. 26.
30. The books and accounts of the Commission are audited by the Auditor General.
1972, c. 55, s. 27; 2008, c. 23, s. 21.
§ 2. — Functions and powers of the Commission
31. The Commission has competence in any matter governed by a regulation made under section 5 or by
an ordinance contemplated in section 89.
1972, c. 55, s. 28; 1986, c. 67, s. 6.
32. The Commission may, within the scope of the regulations,
(1) issue permits and fix the valid period thereof;
(2) transfer any permit or any right granted by a permit;
(3) impose conditions and restrictions on the use of a permit and limit the use of certain services of a
permit holder to certain users;
(4) (paragraph repealed);
(5) receive scales of charges for filing, which may include minimum, maximum or both minimum and
maximum charges, and change, suspend or cancel all or some of them;
(6) perform any other functions conferred on it by law.
1972, c. 55, s. 29; 1974, c. 61, s. 5; 1975, c. 45, s. 12; 1977, c. 41, s. 73; 1981, c. 8, s. 10; 1981, c. 26, s. 6; 1983, c. 46, s. 113; 1984, c.
23, s. 23; 1985, c. 35, s. 63; 1986, c. 67, s. 7; 1998, c. 8, s. 2.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 12 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
32.1. The Commission shall refuse to issue, renew or transfer a permit where the applicant is unable to
prove his compliance with the conditions set out under this Act or the standards, if any, prescribed by
regulation.
The same shall apply where the Commission has reasonable grounds to believe, in the exercise of its
powers under section 5.1, that such a permit ought not to be issued, renewed or transferred.
1986, c. 92, s. 3.
33. The Commission may, within the scope of its regulations, establish and delimit territorial divisions.
1975, c. 45, s. 13.
34. The Commission may, in its own right or at the request of any interested person, classify the rights
granted by permits, and classify the clauses of any permit.
The Government may, by regulation, classify the clauses of the permits it indicates or the rights granted by
those permits, fix the duration thereof and determine the conditions and rules applying thereto.
Where the classification is not done in the presence of the persons concerned, the Commission shall notify
them of it and give them an opportunity to present observations.
1975, c. 45, s. 13; 1986, c. 92, s. 4; 1997, c. 43, s. 803.
34.1. The Commission may, within the scope of its rules of procedure and internal management, set down
principles for the management of its affairs.
1981, c. 8, s. 11; 1983, c. 46, s. 114; 1986, c. 92, s. 5; 1997, c. 43, s. 804; 1998, c. 40, s. 158.
35. The Commission, when informed that a carrier is endangering public health and safety, may prohibit
the carrier from operating any vehicle designated by the Commission and order the Société de l’assurance
automobile du Québec to withdraw the registration markers and registration certificate of that vehicle.
However, it shall not issue such an order without first notifying the carrier in writing as prescribed by
section 5 of the Act respecting administrative justice (chapter J-3) and allowing the carrier at least 10 days to
present observations. Even if the carrier does not present observations within that time, the Commission must
at least receive the observations of its investigator.
Notwithstanding section 23, the Société de l’assurance automobile du Québec must forthwith carry out the
Commission’s order and shall not return the registration markers and the registration certificate to the former
holder or issue new ones to him without prior authorization by the Commission.
This section does not apply to a person subject to the Act respecting owners, operators and drivers of
heavy vehicles (chapter P-30.3).
1972, c. 55, s. 30; 1977, c. 5, s. 14; 1980, c. 38, s. 18; 1990, c. 19, s. 11; 1997, c. 43, s. 805; 1998, c. 40, s. 159; 2005, c. 39, s. 52.
35.1. The Commission shall compile the information determined by regulation of the Government
respecting transport services, on the conditions determined thereby.
1986, c. 92, s. 6.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 13 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
§ 2.1. — Mediation
2011, c. 9, s. 3.
35.2. If the president of the Commission considers it expedient and the subject matter and circumstances
of the case so permit, the president may, with the consent of the parties and on payment by both parties of the
mediation fees determined by regulation of the Commission, refer any dispute in respect of which the
Commission may intervene under a legislative provision to a mediator designated by the president.
Unless the parties agree otherwise, the mediation process may not continue for more than 30 days after the
date on which the mediator is appointed by the president.
In exercising the regulatory power under the first paragraph, the Commission may determine different
mediation fees based on whether they are payable by natural or legal persons or by any other category of
persons it determines.
2011, c. 9, s. 3.
35.3. Unless the parties consent to it, nothing that is said or written in the course of a mediation session
may be admitted as evidence before the Commission, before a court of justice or before a person or body of
the administrative branch exercising adjudicative functions.
The mediator may not be compelled to disclose anything revealed to or learned by the mediator in the
exercise of the functions of office or to produce a document prepared or obtained in the course of such
exercise before the Commission, before a court of justice or before a person or body of the administrative
branch exercising adjudicative functions.
Despite section 9 of the Act respecting Access to documents held by public bodies and the Protection of
personal information (chapter A-2.1), no person may have access to a document contained in the mediation
record.
2011, c. 9, s. 3.
35.4. An agreement is recorded in a document signed by the mediator, the parties and, if applicable, their
representatives.
An agreement reached following a mediation session presided by a member of the Commission terminates
the proceedings and is enforceable as a decision of the Commission; an agreement reached following a
mediation session conducted by any other person has the same effects, provided it is homologated by the
Commission.
2011, c. 9, s. 3.
35.5. The mediator shall send the agreement or, if no agreement is reached, the report, to the Commission.
2011, c. 9, s. 3.
35.6. No proceedings may be brought against the mediator for an official act performed in good faith in
the exercise of the functions of office.
2011, c. 9, s. 3.
§ 3. — Permits
36. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any general law or special Act, no person may act as
carrier or provide the services of a means of transport or transport system for direct or indirect remuneration
unless he holds the permit prescribed for that purpose by regulation.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 14 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
The first paragraph does not apply to a public body which, within the scope of its act of incorporation, acts
as a carrier or provides a service by the use of a means of transport or a transport system, for direct or indirect
remuneration.
In addition, this section does not operate to require an owner or operator of heavy vehicles, within the
meaning of the Act respecting owners, operators and drivers of heavy vehicles (chapter P-30.3), to obtain a
permit under this Act except to the extent provided for therein.
1972, c. 55, s. 31; 1974, c. 61, s. 6; 1975, c. 45, s. 14; 1983, c. 32, s. 1; 1998, c. 40, s. 160; 2001, c. 15, s. 134; 2005, c. 39, s. 52; 22016,
c. 22, s. 50;1 22019, c. 18, s. 267.1 0
0 1
36.1. N1o person may, subject to the exceptions prescribed by regulation, engage in transport broke6rage
under a go9vernment contract unless he holds a brokerage permit issued by the Commission. ,
, c
No percmit is required, however, if no brokerage service can be obtained under a brokerage permit is. sued
by the Co.mmission, at the place of destination of the trip or on the site of road construction, repai2 r or
maintenan1ce or of excavation, levelling or demolition work where transport services are required. 2
8
1988, c. 67, s. 4; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 1999, c. 82, s. 4.
36.2. (Repealed).
1988, c. 67, s. 4; 1991, c. 59, s. 3; 1999, c. 82, s. 5.
36.3. A brokerage permit shall be issued for a brokerage zone established by the Commission within a
region defined by regulation.
1988, c. 67, s. 4; 1991, c. 59, s. 4.
37. Unless otherwise prescribed by regulation, every permit shall be valid for not over one year, expire on
the last day of March each year and may be renewed, with or without changes.
1972, c. 55, s. 32; 1981, c. 8, s. 12; 1984, c. 23, s. 24; 1985, c. 35, s. 64; 1986, c. 92, s. 7.
37.1. Unless otherwise prescribed by regulation, a permit is deemed renewed for one year if, before its
expiry date,
(1) the permit holder has paid to the Société de l’assurance automobile du Québec the duties and fees
payable pursuant to section 31.1 of the Highway Safety Code (chapter C-24.2) in order to preserve the right to
drive the road vehicle used to provide the transport service authorized by the permit;
(2) the permit holder furnishes the number of the registration marker of the vehicle used to the
Commission.
1984, c. 23, s. 24; 1986, c. 92, s. 8; 1986, c. 91, s. 655; 1987, c. 97, s. 107; 1990, c. 19, s. 11; 1991, c. 59, s. 5.
37.1.1. An application for the reinstatement of a bus transport permit issued before 18 December 1986 or
issued on or after that date to replace such a permit may be filed with the Commission within 12 months after
the expiry of the permit.
The Commission may reinstate the permit where the applicant shows that it could not be renewed within
the prescribed time for a reason provided in the regulation or for any other reason the Commission considers
reasonable. The Commission shall, however, hold a public hearing where the reason invoked is not provided
in the regulation.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 15 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
If reinstatement is granted, it is equivalent to renewal of the permit. However, it has effect from the
decision of the Commission, and the reinstated permit expires on the date on which it would have expired if it
had been renewed.
1993, c. 24, s. 3; 1999, c. 82, s. 6.
37.2. Where a permit has been renewed under section 37.1, the Commission may, in addition to the cases
provided for in section 40, on its own initiative or upon request, revoke the permit on any ground provided in
section 32.1 or amend it as in the case of a renewal.
The Commission shall, before doing so, notify the permit holder in writing as prescribed by section 5 of
the Act respecting administrative justice (chapter J-3) and allow the permit holder at least 10 days to present
observations.
1986, c. 92, s. 8; 1997, c. 43, s. 806.
37.3. A renewable permit that is not renewable by the procedure in section 37.1 may be so renewed if an
application is submitted to the Commission before its expiry date.
The permit remains in force in such a case until the decision of the Commission becomes enforceable.
1986, c. 92, s. 8; 2011, c. 9, s. 4.
38. The Government may, by regulation, authorize the Commission to issue, in such cases and on such
conditions as it may determine, special permits for a period of less than one year and temporary permits for a
maximum period of 45 days. Such permits shall not be renewed; however, a temporary permit may be
converted into a special permit and a special permit into a regular permit, following the procedure provided in
the regulations.
1972, c. 55, s. 33; 1974, c. 61, s. 7; 1975, c. 45, s. 15; 1987, c. 97, s. 108; 2001, c. 27, s. 4.
38.1. Where the Commission issues a permit, it may determine periods during which the permit holder
may suspend his service.
1985, c. 35, s. 65.
38.2. The Government may, by regulation, authorize the Commission to issue, on such conditions as it
may determine, experimental permits to promote the testing of new equipment or transport systems. Such
permits shall not be renewed.
1985, c. 35, s. 65; 1986, c. 92, s. 9.
39. Every permit shall be issued in the name of a person who is domiciled in Québec or who has an
establishment in Québec which complies with the requirements and other conditions of the regulations of the
Government, unless otherwise provided in any agreement reached under section 10 of the Act respecting the
Ministère des Transports (chapter M-28), according to law.
1972, c. 55, s. 34; 1973, c. 37, s. 3; 1975, c. 45, s. 16; 1985, c. 30, s. 146; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
39.1. A brokerage permit shall be issued only to a company constituted as a non-profit legal person or as a
cooperative, composed of operators registered in the bulk trucking register.
To obtain a brokerage permit, the company must, in addition to meeting the conditions prescribed by
regulation for the issue of the permit, satisfy the standards of representativeness prescribed by regulation,
including the standard relating to the date on which the representative character of the company may be
ascertained.
1988, c. 67, s. 5; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 1999, c. 82, s. 7.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 16 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
40. The Commission may, in its own right or at the request of the Minister or any interested person,
change, suspend or revoke the permit of a carrier if he
(a) has been found guilty of an offence against this Act, the regulations or an order or if he has been
found guilty of an indictable offence related to the operation of his means of transport or transport system;
(b) discontinues, limits or extends the services he is authorized to provide under his permit without prior
authorization from the Commission;
(c) does not provide service up to the standard the public is entitled to expect, all things considered;
(c.1) fails to comply with a mediation agreement or the decision of an arbitrator, which are enforceable as
decisions of the Commission, or with an enforceable decision of the Commission;
(d) (subparagraph repealed);
(e) holds a brokerage permit and has a direct or indirect interest in an enterprise that might place his
personal interest in conflict with that of the company, carries on an activity that might place him in a situation
of conflict of interest or, without the prior authorization of the Commission, maintains in office a brokerage
director who has such an interest or carries on such an activity;
(f) uses intimidation, threats or reprisals, or causes them to be used, in order to compel an operator or a
brokerage permit holder to refrain from or cease exercising a right arising from this Act or a regulation.
In the cases referred to in the first paragraph, the Commission may further order the Société de l’assurance
automobile du Québec to withdraw the registration plate and registration certificate from any vehicle used by
the holder of a permit contrary to this Act, a regulation or an order.
The Commission may, in its own right or at the request of the Minister or any interested person, order the
Société de l’assurance automobile du Québec to withdraw the registration plate and registration certificate
from any vehicle used by a person not holding a permit, where the vehicle has been used contrary to this Act,
a regulation or an order.
The Commission may, in its own right or on the request of the Minister or of an interested person, take any
other measure it deems appropriate or reasonable in respect of a carrier for the purposes of this subdivision.
1972, c. 55, s. 35; 1975, c. 45, s. 17; 1981, c. 8, s. 13; 1988, c. 67, s. 6; 1990, c. 19, s. 11; 1991, c. 59, s. 6; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 1999, c.
82, s. 8; 2011, c. 9, s. 5, s. 28; 2011, c. 9, s. 5.
40.1. The Commission cannot exercise the power provided for in section 40 without first having notified
in writing the person concerned, as prescribed by section 5 of the Act respecting administrative justice
(chapter J-3) and having allowed the person at least 10 days to present observations.
1981, c. 8, s. 13; 1990, c. 4, s. 869; 1997, c. 43, s. 808; 2011, c. 9, s. 6.
40.2. In the cases referred to in the second and third paragraphs of section 40, the Société de l’assurance
automobile du Québec must forthwith carry out the Commission’s order and may in no case return the
registration plate and the registration certificate to the former holder or issue new ones to him without prior
authorization from the Commission.
1981, c. 8, s. 13; 1990, c. 19, s. 11.
40.3. Notwithstanding section 40, the Commission shall revoke the bus transport permit of a carrier who
does not provide, for a period of at least 30 days, the services authorized by his permit unless he demonstrates
that the reason for his failure cannot be attributed to him.
1985, c. 35, s. 66.
Updated to 1November 01 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 17 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
41. The transfer, in any form, by a carrier, of the ownership or control of a means of transport or a
transport system that he operates by virtue of a permit does not effect the transfer of such permit unless the
assigning party or the transferee of such means of transport or transport system applies to the Commission for
the transfer of such permit, and obtains such transfer from it.
The Commission may, even if there is no regulation applicable, maintain, change, transfer or cancel a
permit, in the case of a transfer of ownership or the change of control of a means of transport or a transport
system.
1972, c. 55, s. 36; 1975, c. 45, s. 18, s. 39; 1981, c. 8, s. 14.
42. A permit holder shall provide the services his permit authorizes him to provide, on the conditions and
by the means or systems prescribed by the regulations applicable to his permit.
1972, c. 55, s. 37; 1981, c. 8, s. 15.
42.1. The holder of a brokerage permit may claim and receive payment in the name of the transport
brokerage service subscribers he represents for the transport services provided at his request unless the
transport contract or transport brokerage contract provides otherwise.
He shall deposit in a trust account the sums he receives under the first paragraph and administer them in
accordance with the administrative and management standards prescribed by government regulation.
1988, c. 67, s. 7; 1999, c. 82, s. 9.
42.2. The holder of a brokerage permit may make representations to the Commission in relation to any
matter concerning transport brokerage or registration or entries in the bulk trucking register.
1988, c. 67, s. 7; 1997, c. 43, s. 809; 1999, c. 82, s. 10.
43. No permit holder may discontinue, reduce or extend the services his permit authorizes him to provide
or change the conditions thereof without prior authorization from the Commission.
1972, c. 55, s. 38; 1981, c. 8, s. 15.
44. Every person or partnership intending to acquire, directly or indirectly, by purchase, lease, merger,
consolidation or otherwise, an interest in the business or undertaking of a person whose main occupation is
transport, must give to the Commission notice of the intended acquisition; in such case, the Commission may,
within the scope of the regulations, maintain, amend or revoke any permit concerned.
Even if no notice is given, the Commission, in its own right or at the request of the Minister or any
interested person, may make an inquiry to determine whether an acquisition within the meaning of the first
paragraph has been made and, if so, it may, within the scope of the regulations, maintain, amend or revoke
any permit concerned.
In the cases contemplated in the first two paragraphs, the Commission, where there is no regulation
applicable, may maintain, amend or revoke any permit concerned.
1972, c. 55, s. 39; 1975, c. 45, s. 19; 1981, c. 8, s. 16; 1997, c. 43, s. 810; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
45. (Repealed).
1975, c. 45, s. 19; 1981, c. 8, s. 17; 1987, c. 97, s. 109.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 18 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
§ 4. — Tariffs
1998, c. 8, s. 13.
46. The Commission may, by regulation, fix tariffs in respect of services for the transport of persons and
transport brokerage services referred to in the first paragraph of section 2, including inter-zone brokerage
services.
The Commission may also fix a tariff in respect of one or more specific carriers, at the request of those
carriers.
The Government may limit the powers of the Commission to fix tariffs. It may, in particular, with regard to
a given service or territory, determine that the tariffs are to be fixed by the carriers concerned and filed with
the Commission; where such is the case, the Government shall determine by regulation the procedure
applicable to the filing of a tariff and the conditions subject to which the tariff comes into force.
1972, c. 55, s. 40; 1975, c. 45, s. 38; 1981, c. 8, s. 18; 1998, c. 8, s. 3; 1999, c. 82, s. 11.
46.1. A draft regulation under section 46 is not subject to the publication requirements set out in section 8
of the Regulations Act (chapter R-18.1).
The fixing of tariffs by regulation is, however, subject to prior consultation. For that purpose, a notice shall
be published in a daily newspaper inviting interested persons to present their observations.
1998, c. 8, s. 3.
47. (Repealed).
1975, c. 45, s. 20; 1981, c. 8, s. 19; 1995, c. 52, s. 4; 1998, c. 8, s. 4.
§ 4.1. — Forest transport contracts
1991, c. 59, s. 7; 1999, c. 82, s. 12.
47.1. Every contract for the forest transport of timber that has been cross-cut, stripped or barked only and
that is taken from forests in the domain of the State must be consistent with the stipulations prescribed by
regulation; such stipulations may in particular provide for conciliation and arbitration rules.
The stipulations of a forest transport contract may not modify the conditions of employment of the truck
drivers of the parties, contained in a collective agreement, or the conciliation and arbitration rules relating
thereto.
Failure to meet the requirements of the first paragraph renders the contract null.
1991, c. 59, s. 7; 1999, c. 82, s. 12.
47.2. (Replaced).
1991, c. 59, s. 7; 1999, c. 82, s. 12.
47.3. (Replaced).
1991, c. 59, s. 7; 1999, c. 82, s. 12.
47.4. (Replaced).
1991, c. 59, s. 7; 1999, c. 82, s. 12.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 19 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
47.5. (Replaced).
1991, c. 59, s. 7; 1999, c. 82, s. 12.
47.6. (Replaced).
1991, c. 59, s. 7; 1999, c. 82, s. 12.
47.7. (Replaced).
1991, c. 59, s. 7; 1999, c. 82, s. 12.
47.8. (Replaced).
1991, c. 59, s. 7; 1999, c. 82, s. 12.
§ 4.2. — Bulk trucking register
1999, c. 82, s. 13.
47.9. The Commission shall keep and maintain a bulk trucking register for the registration of operators of
heavy vehicles to whom a stipulation, contained in a government contract, for the benefit of small bulk
trucking enterprises applies.
The name of an operator and the address of the operator’s main establishment constitute public
information.
The Commission may, by regulation, after consulting the Commission d’accès à l’information, prescribe
that the other personal information contained in the register which it determines constitutes public
information.
The opinion of the Commission d’accès à l’information shall be tabled in the National Assembly within 15
days of receiving it or, if the Assembly is not sitting, within 15 days of resumption.
1999, c. 82, s. 13; 2001, c. 27, s. 5.
47.10. Operators of heavy vehicles who, on 31 December 1999, were authorized to transport all the bulk
materials described in Group 1 of section 3 of the Regulation respecting bulk trucking (R.R.Q., 1981, c. T-12,
r.3), either as holders of a bulk trucking permit issued under this Act or as holders of an intra-provincial truck
transport licence issued under Part III of the Motor Vehicle Transport Act, 1987 (Revised Statutes of Canada,
1985, chapter M-12.01), shall be registered.
The Commission shall, for each registration, record in the register the number corresponding to the
operating region for which the permit or licence was issued and in which the operator subscribes to the
brokerage service operated by a brokerage permit holder.
Where the operator was the holder of more than one permit or licence issued for more than one region, the
Commission shall indicate in the register the numbers corresponding to those regions; the numbers shall be
replaced by the number corresponding to the region in which the operator registers with the brokerage service.
In addition, the Commission must indicate in the register the number of trucks operated under the permits or
licences; that number shall be reduced, where applicable, to correspond to the number of trucks registered by
the operator with the brokerage service.
Subject to a removal from the register under section 47.13, the registration may be transferred by the
Commission at the request of the transferor and the transferee.
1999, c. 82, s. 13.
Updated to 1November 01 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 20 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
47.11. Upon request, the Commission may register an operator of heavy vehicles who satisfies the
conditions determined by regulation and whose principal establishment is located outside Québec in the
territory of a party to the Agreement on Internal Trade.
The operator shall inform the Commission, for entry in the register in accordance with the conditions
determined by regulation, of the brokerage zone in which the operator subscribes to the brokerage service and
of the number of trucks owned by the operator and registered with the brokerage service.
The registration may not be transferred.
1999, c. 82, s. 13.
47.12. To maintain registration, an operator of heavy vehicles must
(1) subscribe to the brokerage service, if any, operated by a brokerage permit holder in the zone or, where
applicable, the territory determined by regulation, in which his principal establishment is located, and, where
applicable, register his trucks with the inter-zone brokerage service operated by the regional association
recognized in his operating region;
(2) maintain his principal establishment in his operating region or, where applicable, in the territory
determined by regulation or, in the case of an operator referred to in section 47.11, maintain his principal
establishment outside Québec;
(3) register with the brokerage service only trucks registered in his name and the number of which
corresponds to the number furnished to the Commission for his operating region;
(4) pay annually the duties fixed by regulation to the Commission, according to the terms and conditions
determined by the Government.
1999, c. 82, s. 13; 2011, c. 9, s. 7.
47.13. The Commission may, on its own initiative or at the request of a brokerage permit holder, a
recognized regional association or an interested person, remove from the register
(1) an operator who does not satisfy the requirements of section 47.12;
(2) an operator referred to in section 47.11 who is a legal person more than 50% of the voting rights
attached to the shares of which are held directly or indirectly by a person whose principal establishment is in
Québec or in respect of which a majority of the directors can be elected by the latter person or, in the case of a
natural person, who is associated with a person whose principal establishment is in Québec;
(3) an operator that has been assigned an “unsatisfactory” safety rating under the Act respecting owners,
operators and drivers of heavy vehicles (chapter P-30.3);
(4) an operator whose acts or omissions led to his expulsion from the brokerage service;
(5) an operator who uses intimidation, threats or reprisals, or causes them to be used, in order to compel
an operator or a brokerage permit holder to refrain from or cease exercising a right arising from this Act or a
regulation;
(6) an operator who fails to comply with a mediation agreement or the decision of an arbitrator, which are
enforceable as decisions of the Commission, or with an enforceable decision of the Commission;
(7) an operator who is an officer of a brokerage permit holder that fails to comply with a mediation
agreement or the decision of an arbitrator, which are enforceable as decisions of the Commission, or with an
enforceable decision of the Commission, and who prescribed, authorized, consented to, acquiesced in or
participated in the act or omission contravening the agreement or the decision.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 21 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
The Commission may, on its own initiative or on request, take any other measure it deems appropriate or
reasonable in respect of an operator for the purposes of this subdivision.
Before removing an operator from the register or taking any other measure in respect of the operator, the
Commission shall notify him in writing as prescribed by section 5 of the Act respecting administrative justice
(chapter J-3) and give the operator at least 10 days to present observations.
The Commission may grant time to enable the operator to remedy the situation, where the reason for the
failure that would entail his removal from the register or the imposition of any other measure is a reason
determined by regulation.
1999, c. 82, s. 13; 2005, c. 39, s. 51; 2011, c. 9, s. 8, s. 28; 2011, c. 9, s. 8.
§ 4.3. — Brokerage services
1999, c. 82, s. 13.
47.13.1. Before being approved under section 8, a by-law concerning transport brokerage services under a
government contract adopted by a brokerage permit holder must be approved by at least two thirds of the
permit holder’s subscribers in attendance at a special meeting where at least one fourth of the subscribers are
present.
The special meeting takes place following a notice sent to the subscribers, at least 15 days before the date
of the meeting, at the last address given to the brokerage permit holder. The notice must state the date, time
and place of the meeting, and the agenda. It must also mention any new by-law or amendment to a by-law that
may be approved at the meeting. The notice must be accompanied by the by-law to be submitted for approval
at the meeting.
In the case of a by-law referred to in the first paragraph that accompanies an application for a brokerage
permit, and for the purposes of the first and second paragraphs, “subscribers” means all the operators of heavy
vehicles registered in the bulk trucking register who, during the subscription period, signed a contract with the
applicant for the brokerage services offered under the permit to which the application refers.
2011, c. 9, s. 9.
47.13.2. A brokerage permit holder may submit to the approval prescribed in section 8 a by-law that has
been approved in accordance with section 47.13.1 and that provides that all the permit holder’s by-laws in
force concerning transport brokerage services under government contracts, and only those by-laws, also apply
to contracts other than government contracts to which the permit holder is a party.
If the by-law is approved under section 8, the Commission, each of its members, any person designated
under section 17.8 and any person authorized to act as an inspector under section 49.2 have the powers
provided in this Act to ensure compliance with the by-law as if the permit holder and the subscribers were
acting under a government contract. The provisions of this Act, and those of the regulations, that govern
brokerage services offered under government contracts then apply, with the necessary modifications, to
services offered under other contracts to which the permit holder is a party.
2011, c. 9, s. 9.
47.14. The holder of a brokerage permit shall establish, at the times determined in the holder’s by-laws, a
single priority listing classifying all subscribers’ trucks according to their order of priority and, where
applicable, their class. The order of priority of the trucks belonging to the same subscriber shall be furnished
by the subscriber to the holder of the brokerage permit in accordance with the operating rules of the brokerage
permit holder.
The time worked by a subscriber while operating a truck assigned by a brokerage permit holder shall be
compiled with the working time allocated to the subscriber pursuant to the operating rules and disciplinary
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 22 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
measures provided for in the by-laws of the brokerage permit holder. The brokerage permit holder shall
allocate to a new subscriber the average working time of the other subscribers or, in the case of a transfer, the
working time of the transferor.
The order of the trucks on the priority list gives priority to subscribers having accumulated the least
working time with their first trucks.
1999, c. 82, s. 13; 2011, c. 9, s. 10.
47.15. Except to satisfy the specific requirements of a request made in accordance with his by-laws, the
brokerage permit holder shall distribute the requests for bulk trucking services among his subscribers
according to the order of their trucks on the priority list. The assignment is valid for the duration of the
service requested or, where applicable, until a new priority list is implemented.
If the subscribers are unable to satisfy the request, the brokerage permit holder shall call upon the services
of another brokerage permit holder through the recognized regional association, if any.
1999, c. 82, s. 13.
47.15.1. The fees a brokerage permit holder claims from a new or existing subscriber to the permit
holder’s services must not vary depending on
(1) whose services the subscribing operator had previously subscribed to or, in the case of a transfer, the
operator who transferred the registration; or
(2) the zone or the territory in which the main establishment of the operator is or was located or, in the
case of a transfer, the operator who transferred the registration.
2011, c. 9, s. 11.
47.16. The operating rules to which the second paragraph of section 47.14 refers may, in particular,
include exclusivity rules that, in the contracts of adhesion between the subscribers and the brokerage permit
holder,
(1) impose on the subscriber the obligation to refer to the brokerage service any request for service
received directly from a customer of the brokerage permit holder or any other person to whom the holder has
submitted a written offer for the supply of the services concerned;
(2) prohibit the subscriber from having a third person transport bulk material, without first having
solicited the services of the brokerage permit holder.
1999, c. 82, s. 13.
47.17. For the purposes of sections 47.14 to 47.16, the by-laws of the brokerage permit holder may
provide that the trucks of a group of subscribers who are related corporations within the meaning of the
Taxation Act (chapter I-3) will be classified as if they belonged to a single subscriber, and that the group may
designate, as first trucks of the group of related corporations, the number of trucks determined in the by-laws
of the holder, without exceeding three.
1999, c. 82, s. 13.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 23 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
§ 4.4. — Arbitration
2011, c. 9, s. 12.
47.18. The president of the Commission may, on a request from either party, appoint an arbitrator to settle
a dispute between a brokerage permit holder and a subscriber concerning the application of sections 47.14 to
47.17 or of a by-law approved under section 8.
2011, c. 9, s. 12.
47.19. The arbitrator may not have an interest in the dispute or have acted as a representative of either
party, or, unless the parties agree to it, have acted as a mediator in a dispute between the parties.
2011, c. 9, s. 12.
47.20. The arbitrator has all the powers necessary for the exercise of the arbitrator’s jurisdiction. The
arbitrator settles the dispute in accordance with the applicable rules of law and decides on every question of
fact. The arbitrator may, in particular, order either party to do or not do something.
2011, c. 9, s. 12.
47.21. The arbitrator’s decision must be rendered within three months after being taken under advisement.
It must be in writing, give reasons and be signed. It must be forwarded without delay to the parties. The
decision is public and forms part of the records of the Commission.
The arbitrator’s decision has effect from the date it is signed or from any later date given in the decision
and is enforceable as a decision of the Commission.
No appeal lies from the arbitrator’s decision.
2011, c. 9, s. 12.
47.22. The losing party must pay the arbitration costs determined by regulation of the Commission unless,
in a substantiated decision, the arbitrator orders the other party to pay all the costs or determines the
proportion of the costs each party must pay.
2011, c. 9, s. 12.
47.23. No proceedings may be brought against the arbitrator for an official act performed in good faith in
the exercise of the functions of office.
2011, c. 9, s. 12.
§ 5. — Procedure
48. The Commission may adopt rules of procedure and rules of internal management.
The name and address of any person who makes an application to the Commission constitute public
information.
The Commission may, by regulation, after consulting the Commission d’accès à l’information, prescribe
that the other personal information it determines from the information furnished by a person in support of an
application constitutes public information.
The opinion of the Commission d’accès à l’information shall be tabled in the National Assembly within 15
days of receiving it or, if the Assembly is not sitting, within 15 days of resumption.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 24 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
The Commission has all the powers necessary to publish, cause to be published at the expense of the
person it designates or make public by any other means any decision or notice required under this Act or the
Act respecting owners, operators and drivers of heavy vehicles (chapter P-30.3).
1972, c. 55, s. 41; 1973, c. 37, s. 4; 1984, c. 23, s. 25; 1997, c. 43, s. 812; 1998, c. 40, s. 161; 2001, c. 27, s. 6; 2005, c. 39, s. 52.
48.1. (Repealed).
1981, c. 8, s. 20; 1987, c. 97, s. 110.
DIVISION V.1
REGIONAL ASSOCIATION OF TRUCKERS SUBSCRIBING TO A BROKERAGE SERVICE
1991, c. 59, s. 8; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
48.2. A regional association of truckers that is constituted as a non-profit legal person may be recognized
by the Commission where the legal person proves that it represents more than 50% of the subscribers to a
brokerage service in the brokerage zones established in its region in accordance with section 36.3, and that it
can adequately represent the majority of such subscribers.
1991, c. 59, s. 8; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 1999, c. 82, s. 14.
48.3. The principal functions of a regional association recognized by the Commission are to represent the
subscribers to a brokerage service, and to promote their interests, in particular by improving and promoting
truck transportation of bulk materials, by establishing social benefits and by organizing administrative
services for brokerage companies.
For the purposes of the first paragraph, the association may
(1) enter into contracts with consignors for the transport of bulk material under a government contract, to
the extent that such transport is referred, in accordance with the rules determined in its by-laws, to a
brokerage permit holder for distribution among the operators who subscribe to its inter-zone brokerage
service;
(2) refer, in accordance with the rules determined in its by-laws, any transport under a government
contract that exceeds the capacities of the subscribers of a brokerage permit holder to other brokerage permit
holders for distribution among the operators who subscribe to its inter-zone brokerage service;
(3) (subparagraph repealed);
(4) make representations to the Commission with respect to any matter relating to transport brokerage or
registration and entries in the bulk trucking register.
1991, c. 59, s. 8; 1997, c. 43, s. 813; 1998, c. 8, s. 13; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 1999, c. 82, s. 15.
48.4. Every subscriber to a brokerage service supplied under a brokerage permit is entitled to be a member
of a regional association recognized by the Commission in his region, and may participate in its activities and
administration.
1991, c. 59, s. 8; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
48.5. (Repealed).
1991, c. 59, s. 8; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 1999, c. 82, s. 16.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 25 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
48.6. (Repealed).
1991, c. 59, s. 8; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 1999, c. 82, s. 16.
48.7. To ensure that members’ interests are protected, the Commission may designate a person to be
responsible for inquiring into the management or activities of a regional association.
The person so designated is vested for the purposes of an inquiry with the immunity and powers of a
commissioner appointed under the Act respecting public inquiry commissions (chapter C-37), except the
power to order imprisonment.
1991, c. 59, s. 8; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
48.8. Following an inquiry report of the Commission which shows that protection of the interests of
members of the regional association is not ensured, the Government may order that the powers of that
association be suspended for such period as it may determine, and appoint an administrator who shall exercise
the powers of the board of directors. In urgent cases, however, the Government may act without waiting for
the inquiry report.
1991, c. 59, s. 8; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
48.9. The administrator appointed by the Government may, in the interest of the members of the
association and subject to the rights of third persons in good faith, cancel any decision made by the
association.
1991, c. 59, s. 8; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
48.10. The administrator shall present to the Government, as soon as practicable, a complete report of his
findings together with his recommendations.
The administrator has the powers and immunity of a commissioner appointed under the Act respecting
public inquiry commissions (chapter C-37), except the power to order imprisonment.
1991, c. 59, s. 8.
48.11. Following the report of the administrator, the Government may
(1) lift the suspension of the powers of the board of directors;
(2) order the holding of a special meeting of the members of the regional association in order to elect new
directors.
1991, c. 59, s. 8; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
Updated to 1November 01 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 26 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
DIVISION V.1.1
Repealed, 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
2015, c. 16, s. 16.
§ 1. —
Repealed, 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.1. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2005, c. 39, s. 52; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.2. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.3. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.4. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.5. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.6. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.7. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.8. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.9. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.10. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.11. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.12. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 27 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
48.11.13. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.14. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
§ 2. —
Repealed, 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.15. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.16. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2001, c. 27, s. 7; 2005, c. 39, s. 52; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.17. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.18. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2005, c. 39, s. 52; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.19. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.20. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
§ 3. —
Repealed, 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.21. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.22. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
48.11.23. (Repealed).
2000, c. 35, s. 2; 2015, c. 16, s. 16.
Updated to 1November 01 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 28 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
DIVISION V.2
TRANSPORTATION OF STUDENTS
1993, c. 24, s. 4.
48.12. To drive a bus or minibus used for the transportation of schoolchildren, within the meaning of
Division I of Chapter IV of Title VIII of the Highway Safety Code (chapter C-24.2), or a vehicle used for the
transportation of schoolchildren within the meaning of the Regulation respecting road vehicles used for the
transportation of school children (chapter T-12, r. 17), a person must hold a certificate of competence issued in
accordance with a regulation of the Government.
1993, c. 24, s. 4; 2011, c. 9, s. 13.
48.13. To obtain a certificate of competence, the person must have followed a training course dispensed
by a person authorized to do so by regulation, have paid the costs determined by that person for the course
and have satisfied that person’s requirements for successful completion of the course.
1993, c. 24, s. 4.
48.14. Every driver of a bus or minibus used for the transportation of schoolchildren or a vehicle used for
the transportation of schoolchildren must carry his certificate of competence with him.
1993, c. 24, s. 4; 2011, c. 9, s. 14.
48.15. The driver of a bus or minibus used for the transportation of schoolchildren or a vehicle used for
the transportation of schoolchildren must hand over his certificate of competence for inspection at the request
of a peace officer.
The peace officer must return the certificate to its holder as soon as he has inspected it.
1993, c. 24, s. 4; 2011, c. 9, s. 15.
48.16. No owner, lessee or person having control of a bus or minibus used for the transportation of
schoolchildren or a vehicle used for the transportation of schoolchildren may allow the bus or minibus or
vehicle to be driven by a person who is not the holder of the certificate prescribed in section 48.12.
1993, c. 24, s. 4; 2011, c. 9, s. 16.
48.17. A person authorized to issue certificates of competence may issue a temporary attestation to any
person having paid the costs of a training course referred to in section 48.13, produced a contract of
employment conditional on the successful completion of the course, and paid the cost of issuance of the
temporary attestation.
A temporary attestation shall stand in lieu of the certificate referred to in section 48.12 for a period of six
months from its date of issue. It may not be renewed.
1996, c. 56, s. 148.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 29 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
DIVISION V.3
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC TRANSIT SERVICE
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
§ 1. — Organization and management
2015, c. 16, s. 17.
48.18. A local municipality may, by a by-law a copy of which must be sent to the Minister, organize a
public transit service in the territory of the municipality and provide links to points outside the territory. The
proposed service must be described in the by-law.
A by-law of a local municipality of the North Shore or South Shore within the meaning of the Act
respecting the Réseau de transport métropolitain (chapter R-25.01) must be approved by the Autorité
régionale de transport métropolitain.
2005, c. 6, s. 237; 22001166,, cc.. 88, s. 1131.
48.19. The public transit service may only be supplied by a carrier that is a public body providing public
transit, a holder of a bus transport permit, a school bus carrier under contract with the municipality, an owner
of an authorized automobile within the meaning of paragraph 1 of section 9 of the Act respecting remunerated
passenger transportation by automobile (chapter T-11.2), an operator of a transportation system authorized
under that Act or a service association comprising such owners.
When the contract is made with a school bus carrier, the carrier may use vehicles other than school buses
or minibuses. In such a case, the carrier may not use those vehicles to transport pupils.
2005, c. 6, s. 237; 2008, c. 18, s. 111; 22016, c. 17, s. 1311; 22019, c. 18, s. 2681.
0 0
48.20. (Repealed). 1 1
6 9
2005, c. 6, s. 237; 22016, c. 17, s. 132.1, ,
0 c c
48.21. (Rep1ealed). . .
6 1 1
2005, c. 6, s. 237; 22,016, c. 17, s. 1321.
7 8
0c
48.22. (Rep1.ealed).
61
2005, c. 6, s. 237; ,22 7016, c. 17, s. 132.1
c0
48.23. Upo.1n making a contract, a local municipality must send a copy to the Minister and to the
Commission. 16
7,
When the cocntract provides that the remuneration of the carrier is to be based, in whole or for the greater
part, on the nu.mber of passengers carried, it must indicate, on an annual basis, the number of passengers
projected by t1he parties and contain a clause whereby the municipality undertakes to make up any
insufficiency o7f receipts attributable to a smaller number of passengers than the number projected in the
contract.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.24. The municipality shall, by resolution, set the various passenger fares for the classes of users it
determines.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 30 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
The municipality may make changes in the service; the changes are made by by-law, except schedule
changes, which may be made by resolution.
A certified copy of any resolution concerning fares or schedules must be published in a newspaper in the
territory of the municipality and be posted in every vehicle. No fare or schedule change may come into force
before the expiry of 30 days after the date of publication and posting.
The carrier must collect fares and provide the new service. The contract must contain clauses for adjusting
the contract price to take account of changes in the service.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.25. A member of the council who proposes that a by-law be adopted to make a change in the service
must table a draft by-law. A summary of the draft must be published in a newspaper in the territory of the
municipality and be posted in the carrier’s vehicles at least 30 days before the adoption of the by-law.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.26. A copy of a by-law making a change in the service must be sent to the Minister.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.27. (Repealed).
2005, c. 6, s. 237; 22001166,, cc.. 88, s. 1141; 2 2017, c. 13, s. 2251.
0
48.28. A draft by-law of a1 council providing for the establishment of links to points within the territory of
a public body providing public7 transit, or for changes in those links, must be sent to the body and to each local
municipality whose territory i,s included in that of the body and is concerned by the proposed route at least 30
days before the date set for thec adoption of the by-law.
.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
1
3
48.29. In the cases provided for in section 48.28, a local municipality, when sending its by-law to the
Minister, must attach a copy of the notices it has received from the public body providing public transit and
from the municipalities to which the draft by-law has been sent.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.30. On the occasion of a special event, a local municipality may make a contract by resolution with a
carrier referred to in section 48.19 to provide a temporary public transit service in the territory of the
municipality that does not compete with the service provided by the holder of a permit pursuant to that
permit.
2005, c. 6, s. 237; 2008, c. 18, s. 112; 22016, c. 17, s. 1331.
0
48.31. A local municipality1 may lease or acquire property for the purpose of organizing a public transit
service, and entrust the property6 to the carrier under contract with it. It may also make service contracts.
,
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
c
.
48.32. Transport supplied under sections 48.18 to 48.31 is not under the jurisdiction of the Commission.
1
7
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.33. The Commission may not issue a bus transport permit or alter the service that the holder of a bus
transport permit is authorized to supply in the territory of a municipality, a group of municipalities or an
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 31 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
intermunicipal board that organizes a public transit service, without the prior authorization of the
municipality, the municipality that is the mandatary of the group of municipalities or the intermunicipal board.
If the municipality or the intermunicipal board does not indicate its refusal to the Commission within 60
days after the Commission’s application for authorization, it is deemed to have given its authorization.
This section does not apply in the case of a cancellation or reduction of service or in the case of the
establishment of a new service that does not compete with the public transit service organized by the
municipality, the municipality that is the mandatary of the group of municipalities or the intermunicipal board.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.34. For the purposes of this subdivision, unless the context indicates another meaning, the service
consists of the routes, frequency and schedule of trips.
2005, c. 6, s. 237; 2015, c. 16, s. 18.
48.35. A local municipality may take any appropriate measure to promote the organization and operation
of public transit services it does not organize itself and to provide support services to the users and organizers
of those services.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.36. A local municipality, by resolution, may grant a subsidy to the holder of a bus transport permit that
serves the territory of the municipality or maintains a route in the territory.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
§ 2. — Inspection
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
48.36.1. A local municipality shall generally or specially authorize any person from among its employees
and officers or from among the employees of a carrier under contract with it to act as an inspector for the
purposes of this subdivision, subdivision 3 and the by-laws made under section 48.36.4.
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
48.36.2. An inspector may require that any transportation ticket issued under the municipality’s authority
be produced for inspection.
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
48.36.3. An inspector shall, on request, produce a certificate of authority.
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
§ 3. — Regulatory and penal provisions
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
48.36.4. A local municipality may, by by-law, prescribe conditions regarding the possession and use of
transportation tickets issued under its authority. The by-law may determine, among its provisions, those
whose violation constitutes an offence entailing a fine in an amount that may be fixed or that may, depending
on the circumstances, vary between a minimum and a maximum amount.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 32 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
For a first offence, the fixed amount or maximum amount may not exceed $500 if the offender is a natural
person or $1,000 in all other cases. The amounts are doubled for a subsequent offence. The minimum amount
may not be less than $25.
The by-law referred to in the first paragraph must be published in a newspaper distributed in the territory
of the municipality. It comes into force on the fifteenth day following its publication or on any later date
specified in the by-law.
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
48.36.5. A by-law under section 48.36.4 applies even where a carrier’s vehicle is used, under the carrier’s
contract with the municipality, to travel outside the territory of the municipality.
An inspector referred to in section 48.36.1 has jurisdiction for the purposes of the first paragraph.
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
48.36.6. Whoever hinders or attempts to hinder in any way the exercise of the inspector’s functions,
misleads the inspector through concealment or misrepresentation, refuses to hand over a document or
information the inspector is entitled to require or examine, or conceals or destroys such a document is guilty
of an offence and is liable to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500.
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
48.36.7. The municipality may institute penal proceedings for an offence under this subdivision.
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
48.36.8. The municipal court in the territory of the municipality has jurisdiction in respect of any offence
under this subdivision.
In the case of an offence committed outside the territory of the municipality, the municipal court having
jurisdiction in the territory where the offence was committed has jurisdiction with respect to the offence.
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
48.36.9. The fine belongs to the municipality that instituted the penal proceedings.
The costs relating to proceedings instituted before a municipal court belong to the municipality under the
jurisdiction of that court, except the part of the costs remitted to another prosecuting party by the collector
under article 345.2 of the Code of Penal Procedure (chapter C-25.1), and the costs remitted to the defendant or
imposed on that municipality under article 223 of that Code.
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
§ 4. — Other provisions
2015, c. 16, s. 19.
48.37. This division applies, with the necessary modifications, to an intermunicipal board exercising
powers under it.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.38. This division does not apply to a municipality whose territory forms part of the territory of a public
body providing public transit, other than a local municipality of the North Shore or South Shore.
2005, c. 6, s. 237; 22001166,, cc.. 88, s. 1151.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 33 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
DIVISION V.4
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC TRANSIT SERVICE FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.39. A local municipality whose territory is not served by a public transit authority or other public body
providing public transport that offers paratransit services must, by resolution, a copy of which must be sent to
the Minister of Transport, enter into a contract to make paratransit available within its territory. The nature of
the measures to be implemented for the purposes of this section must be described in the resolution.
Similarly, a local municipality may, by resolution, a copy of which must be sent to the Minister of
Transport, enter into a contract to provide links to points outside the territory. The nature of the measures to
be implemented for the purposes of this section must be described in the resolution.
A local municipality may not grant such a contract unless only taxis within the meaning of section 144 of
the Act respecting remunerated passenger transportation by automobile (chapter T-11.2) are used to provide
such means of transportation, except if provided by bus or minibus.
2005, c. 6, s. 237; 2008, c. 18, s. 113; 22016, c. 17, s. 1341; 22019, c. 18, s. 2691.
0 0
48.40. As soon as the contra1ct is made, the 1local municipality must send a copy of it to the Minister and to
the Commission. 6 9
, ,
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
c c
. .
48.41. A local municipality, by resolution, shall set the various passenger fares for the classes of users it
1 1
determines. It may also make c7hanges in the ser8vice by resolution.
A certified copy of any resolution concerning fares must be published in a newspaper in the territory of the
municipality and be posted in each vehicle. No fare may come into force before the expiry of 30 days after the
date of publication and posting.
The carrier shall collect fares and provide the new service. Every contract must contain clauses for
adjusting the contract price to take account of changes in the service.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.42. Sections 48.39 to 48.41 apply, with the necessary modifications, to an intermunicipal board
exercising powers under those sections.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
48.43. A local municipality may also make a resolution, a copy of which must be sent to the Minister, to
grant a subsidy to a non-profit body that organizes a special transportation service for handicapped persons in
the territory of the municipality and, where applicable, provides links to points situated outside the territory.
No such subsidy may be granted before the municipality and the body have made an agreement on the service
to be operated.
Upon making the agreement, the local municipality must send a copy to the Minister.
2005, c. 6, s. 237.
Updated to 1November 01 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 34 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
DIVISION VI
INQUIRIES AND INSPECTIONS
1986, c. 95, s. 325.
49. In exercising its powers, the Commission, each of its members and any person designated by the
Minister under section 17.8 may inquire into any matter within the competence of the Commission.
1972, c. 55, s. 50; 1981, c. 8, s. 21; 1986, c. 95, s. 326.
49.1. For the purposes of an inquiry under section 49, the Commission, each of its members and any
person designated by the Minister under section 17.8 has the powers and immunity of commissioners
appointed under the Act respecting public inquiry commissions (chapter C-37), except the power to impose
imprisonment.
1981, c. 8, s. 21; 1986, c. 95, s. 326.
49.2. The Minister or the Commission may authorize any person to act as an inspector to ascertain
compliance with this Act and the regulations and any other Act which confers jurisdiction upon the
Commission.
Any person so authorized to act as an inspector and any peace officer may, in the performance of his duties
and on public highways as well as roads open to public vehicular traffic, for purposes relevant to enforcement
of this Act,
(1) enter, at any reasonable time, the establishment of a carrier, a consignor or a consignee and inspect it;
(2) examine and make copies of the books, registers, accounts, records and other documents containing
information related to the activities of the persons referred to in subparagraph 1;
(3) where he has reasonable cause to believe that a road vehicle is providing transportation that is subject
to this Act, stop the vehicle, enter and examine it and, for that purpose, open any container or receptacle or
cause it to be opened;
(4) require any information relating to the carrying out of the Act and regulations referred to in the first
paragraph and the production of any relevant document.
Any person having custody, possession or control of such books, registers, accounts, records and other
documents shall, if so required, give communication thereof to the person making the inspection and facilitate
his examination thereof.
1981, c. 8, s. 21; 1986, c. 95, s. 326; 1987, c. 97, s. 111; 1998, c. 40, s. 162; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
49.3. (Replaced).
1981, c. 8, s. 21; 1986, c. 95, s. 326.
49.4. (Replaced).
1981, c. 8, s. 21; 1984, c. 23, s. 26; 1986, c. 95, s. 326.
49.5. (Replaced).
1981, c. 8, s. 21; 1984, c. 23, s. 27; 1986, c. 95, s. 326.
50. It is forbidden to hinder the work of a member of the Commission, a designated person, a person
authorized to act as an inspector, a peace officer or an investigator of the Department in the discharge of his
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 35 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
duties, to mislead him by concealment or false declarations, to refuse to give him information or a document
he is entitled to require or examine under this Act, or to conceal or destroy any document or property
pertaining to an inquiry.
1972, c. 55, s. 51; 1981, c. 8, s. 22; 1984, c. 23, s. 28; 1986, c. 95, s. 327; 1987, c. 97, s. 112.
50.1. Every person authorized by this Act to make an inquiry or inspection must identify himself and show
a certificate of his office or, as the case may be, show his badge.
1981, c. 8, s. 22; 1984, c. 23, s. 29; 1986, c. 95, s. 328; 1987, c. 97, s. 113.
DIVISION VII
PROCEEDING BEFORE THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL OF QUÉBEC
1981, c. 7, s. 551; 1981, c. 8, s. 23; 1997, c. 43, s. 814.
51. Any decision of the Commission may be contested before the Administrative Tribunal of Québec by
the person concerned, a person objecting thereto or the Attorney General within 30 days after the date the
decision takes effect.
1972, c. 55, s. 52; 1981, c. 7, s. 551; 1981, c. 8, s. 23; 1987, c. 97, s. 114; 1997, c. 43, s. 814; 2011, c. 9, s. 17.
52. The Attorney General may, by virtue of his office and without notice, take part in a hearing of the
Tribunal as if he were a party thereto.
1972, c. 55, s. 53; 1978, c. 19, s. 49; 1981, c. 7, s. 551; 1981, c. 8, s. 23; 1997, c. 43, s. 814.
53. The Tribunal shall not, unless there has been an error of law or a significant error of fact in the
contested decision, reevaluate the assessment that the Commission made of the principles, criteria or
discretionary factors the Commission was required to take into account in making its decision.
1972, c. 55, s. 54; 1981, c. 7, s. 551; 1981, c. 8, s. 23; 1987, c. 97, s. 115; 1991, c. 59, s. 9; 1997, c. 43, s. 814.
54. (Replaced).
1972, c. 55, s. 55; 1981, c. 7, s. 551; 1981, c. 8, s. 23; 1997, c. 43, s. 814.
55. (Replaced).
1972, c. 55, s. 56; 1977, c. 5, s. 14; 1980, c. 38, s. 18; 1981, c. 7, s. 551; 1981, c. 8, s. 23; 1997, c. 43, s. 814.
56. (Replaced).
1972, c. 55, s. 57; 1980, c. 38, s. 18; 1981, c. 7, s. 551; 1981, c. 8, s. 23; 1997, c. 43, s. 814.
57. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 58; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
58. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 59; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
59. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 60; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 36 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
60. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 61; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
61. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 62; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
62. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 63; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
63. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 64; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
64. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 65; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
65. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 66; 1975, c. 45, s. 21; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
66. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 67; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
67. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 68; 1977, c. 5, s. 14; 1980, c. 38, s. 18; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
68. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 69; 1977, c. 5, s. 14; 1980, c. 38, s. 18; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
69. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 70; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
70. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 71; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
71. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 72; 1979, c. 37, s. 43; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
72. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 73; 1981, c. 7, s. 551.
Updated to 1November 01 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 37 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
DIVISION VIII
PENAL PROVISIONS
1992, c. 61, s. 609.
73. Every person who contravenes section 50 is guilty of an offence and is liable to a fine of not less than
$700 nor more than $2,100.
1972, c. 55, s. 74; 1981, c. 8, s. 24; 1986, c. 58, s. 109; 1990, c. 4, s. 870; 1993, c. 24, s. 5; 1998, c. 40, s. 163.
74. Every person who contravenes any provision of this Act, the regulations or an order for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or refuses to comply with an order made pursuant to this Act, the regulations or
an order or knowingly makes a false declaration respecting a matter before the Commission is guilty of an
offence and is liable for each day or part of a day during which the offence continues, to a fine of not less than
$125 nor more than $375 for a first offence, and of not less than $250 nor more than $750 for a second or
subsequent offence.
1972, c. 55, s. 75; 1975, c. 45, s. 22; 1981, c. 8, s. 25; 1986, c. 58, s. 110; 1990, c. 4, s. 871; 1991, c. 33, s. 141; 1992, c. 61, s. 660;
1998, c. 40, s. 164; 2011, c. 9, s. 18.
74.1. Every person who contravenes section 36 or section 43 is guilty of an offence and is liable for each
day or part of a day during which the offence continues, to a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,500
for a first offence, and of not less than $1,500 nor more than $2,500 for a second or subsequent offence.
1981, c. 8, s. 25; 1986, c. 58, s. 111; 1988, c. 67, s. 8; 1990, c. 4, s. 872; 1991, c. 33, s. 142; 1991, c. 59, s. 10; 1998, c. 40, s. 165;
1999, c. 82, s. 17.
74.1.1. Every person who contravenes section 42 is guilty of an offence and is liable, for each day or part
of a day during which the offence continues, to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $750 for a first
offence, and of not less than $750 nor more than $2,250 for a second or subsequent offence.
1998, c. 40, s. 165; 1999, c. 82, s. 18.
74.2. A carrier who requires or accepts remuneration for transportation services that differs from the
applicable tariff is guilty of an offence and liable to the fine provided for in section 74.1.1, and to an
additional fine corresponding to the difference between the remuneration that gave rise to the proceedings and
the tariff applicable.
1981, c. 8, s. 25; 1998, c. 8, s. 5; 1998, c. 40, s. 166.
74.2.1. Every person who contravenes section 48.12 is guilty of an offence and is liable to a fine of not
less than $250 nor more than $750.
1993, c. 24, s. 6; 1998, c. 40, s. 167.
74.2.2. Every person who contravenes section 48.14 is guilty of an offence and is liable to a fine of not
less than $250 nor more than $750.
1993, c. 24, s. 6; 1998, c. 40, s. 168.
74.2.3. Every person who contravenes the first paragraph of section 48.15 is guilty of an offence and is
liable to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $750.
1993, c. 24, s. 6; 1998, c. 40, s. 169.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 38 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
74.2.4. Every person who contravenes section 48.16 is guilty of an offence and is liable to a fine of not
less than $250 nor more than $750.
1993, c. 24, s. 6; 1998, c. 40, s. 170.
74.3. Every person who advises, encourages or incites another person to commit an offence against this
Act, the regulations or an order or who does or omits to do something in order to aid another person to
commit an offence is a party to that offence whether or not the offender has been prosecuted or found guilty.
1981, c. 8, s. 25; 1995, c. 52, s. 5.
75. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 76; 1981, c. 8, s. 26; 1990, c. 4, s. 873.
75.1. In any proceeding for a contravention of this Act, the regulations or an order, all services are
presumed to be remunerated.
1981, c. 8, s. 26; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
75.2. (Repealed).
1981, c. 8, s. 26; 1990, c. 4, s. 874.
76. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 77; 1981, c. 8, s. 27; 1990, c. 4, s. 875.
77. When a company is guilty of an offence against this Act or a regulation, every officer, director,
employee or agent of such company who prescribed or authorized the commission of the offence or who
consented thereto or acquiesced or participated therein, is deemed a party to the offence and is liable to the
same penalty as that provided for the company, whether or not the company has been prosecuted or found
guilty.
1972, c. 55, s. 78; 1999, c. 40, s. 322.
77.1. Where a peace officer ascertains the commission of an offence under a provision of this Act, a
regulation or an order, he may serve a statement of offence on the driver with a notice enjoining the defendant
to remedy the offence and to furnish proof thereof within 72 hours.
The statement of offence becomes null when the required proof is furnished to a peace officer within the
time prescribed. It is incumbent upon the defendant to establish that he has remedied the offence within that
time.
Where a notice is attached to the statement of offence, the time prescribed in article 160 of the Code of
Penal Procedure (chapter C-25.1) begins to run only from the expiry of the time indicated in the notice.
1981, c. 8, s. 28; 1992, c. 61, s. 610.
78. (Repealed).
1972, c. 55, s. 79; 1975, c. 45, s. 23; 1992, c. 61, s. 611.
79. (Repealed).
1975, c. 45, s. 23; 1987, c. 97, s. 116.
80. A peace officer may, immediately, when making an inspection under section 49.2,
Updated to 1November 01 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 39 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
(1) seize any vehicle where he has reasonable cause to believe that it is being or was used to commit an
offence against this Act, the regulations or orders and that the person who is using or who used such vehicle
might abscond, until the competent court or a judge of such court authorizes the release of the vehicle with or
without a deposit;
(2) seize any vehicle where he has reasonable cause to believe that it is being or was used to commit an
offence against section 36 or to extend a service authorized by a permit, until the competent court or a judge
of such court authorizes the release of the vehicle with a deposit.
The peace officer who has seized the vehicle shall have custody of it until the competent court has decided
that it is to be confiscated or returned to its owner, at the owner’s expense.
1975, c. 45, s. 23; 1981, c. 8, s. 29; 1982, c. 59, s. 66; 1986, c. 67, s. 8; 1987, c. 97, s. 117; 1990, c. 4, s. 876; 1992, c. 61, s. 661; 1998,
c. 40, s. 171.
80.1. (Repealed).
1984, c. 23, s. 30; 1987, c. 97, s. 118.
DIVISION IX
INTERRUPTION OF TRANSPORT SERVICES
81. If the Government is of opinion that the interruption of the operations of a transport system or service
endangers education, health or public security, it may appoint an administrator to such a system or service.
Except for transport by navigation, this division does not apply when interruption of the transport service is
caused by a labour conflict.
1972, c. 55, s. 157.
82. The administrator appointed under section 81 shall have the right to manage all the property set aside
directly or indirectly by the owner for the use of the service upon his appointment or upon the suspension of
the operations and the right to manage all the persons employed for the above-mentioned purpose.
1972, c. 55, s. 158.
83. Such administrator shall have power to collect all the revenues of the service and enter into any
contract or undertaking which he considers useful or necessary for the above-mentioned purpose. He may
contract loans and give security, acquire and dispose of any property and generally do any act he considers
necessary or useful to restore or maintain such service.
1972, c. 55, s. 159.
84. The remuneration of the administrator shall be fixed by the Government and it shall be charged to the
owner of the service as will any expense incurred by him, less the revenues received.
1972, c. 55, s. 160; 1992, c. 57, s. 704.
85. The administrator may, in such capacity, sue and be sued whenever the owner of the service could sue
or be sued but he cannot be prosecuted personally by reason of any act done in good faith in the exercise of
his functions.
1972, c. 55, s. 161.
86. No application for judicial review under the Code of Civil Procedure (chapter C-25.01) shall be
exercised and no injunction shall be granted against the administrator acting in his official capacity.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 40 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
A judge of the Court of Appeal may, on an application, annul summarily any decision, order or injunction
made or granted contrary to the preceding paragraph.
1972, c. 55, s. 162; 1979, c. 37, s. 43; 2014, c. 1, s. 781; I.N. 2016-01-01 (NCCP).
87. Whoever hinders or obstructs an administrator appointed under section 81 in the exercise of a power or
duty thus assigned to him or fails to obey a lawful order of such an administrator is guilty of an offence and
liable, on summary proceeding, to a fine of not more than $10,000 or imprisonment for not more than two
years or to both the fine and imprisonment.
1972, c. 55, s. 163.
88. Upon the report of the Minister attesting that the owner of a transport service is able and willing to
resume the service, the Government may revoke the appointment of the administrator appointed under section
81.
1972, c. 55, s. 164.
DIVISION IX.1
FINANCING OF CERTAIN PUBLIC TRANSIT SERVICES
1991, c. 32, s. 262.
88.1. For the purposes of this division,
“motorist” means the person in whose name the registration of a passenger vehicle, within the meaning of
the regulation respecting the registration of road vehicles made under section 618 of the Highway Safety
Code (chapter C-24.2), is effected by the Société de l’assurance automobile du Québec;
“public transit authorities” means the Autorité régionale de transport métropolitain, the Société de
transport de Québec, the Société de transport de l’Outaouais, the Société de transport de Lévis, the Société de
transport de Trois-Rivières, the Société de transport du Saguenay and the Société de transport de Sherbrooke.
1991, c. 32, s. 262; 1993, c. 67, s. 121; 1995, c. 65, s. 143; 1999, c. 40, s. 322; 2001, c. 23, s. 240; 2001, c. 66, s. 68; 22001166,, cc.. 88, s. 116.1
88.2. A contribution of motorists to public transit is hereby established.
Every motorist whose address as entered in the registers of the Société de l’assurance automobile du
Québec corresponds to a place situated in the territory of any of the municipalities and Indian reserves listed
in Schedule A is bound to pay a contribution. For the purposes of this division and of Schedule A, an Indian
settlement is considered a reserve.
The motorist shall pay the contribution upon making payment of the sums exigible for obtaining the
registration or of the amounts exigible under section 31.1 of the Highway Safety Code (chapter C-24.2).
A motorist may request the reimbursement of a part of his contribution in the circumstances and on the
conditions prescribed by a regulation made pursuant to paragraph 11.0.1 of section 618 of the Highway Safety
Code. However, no reimbursement is exigible with respect to a change of address.
However, the Government may, by regulation and according to the conditions it establishes, exempt
motorists who benefit from diplomatic, consular or similar privileges or immunities from paying the
contribution.
1991, c. 32, s. 262; 22022, c. 13, s. 86.1
0
2
2
,
Updated to N1ovemberc 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub.1lisher T-12 / 41 of 48
1
3
TRANSPORT ACT
88.3. The Government may, by regulation, fix the amount of the contribution.
1991, c. 32, s. 262.
88.4. The Société de l’assurance automobile du Québec shall pay the motorists’ contributions it collects
into the Consolidated Revenue Fund. The payments are made on the dates and according to the terms agreed
on by the Société and the Minister of Transport; the contributions paid into the Consolidated Revenue Fund
are credited to the Land Transportation Network Fund established by paragraph 1 of section 12.30 of the Act
respecting the Ministère des Transports (chapter M-28).
The Société may deduct an amount representing 2% of the contributions collected, to cover administrative
expenses.
1991, c. 32, s. 262; 2010, c. 20, s. 48; 2010, c. 33, s. 34; 2011, c. 18, s. 288.
88.5. After consultation with the public transit authorities, the Minister shall establish the conditions of
payment to these authorities of the amounts which are credited to the Land Transportation Network Fund
under section 88.4.
Despite section 49 of the Financial Administration Act (chapter A-6.001), the amounts required for
payments under this section are taken out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund. Such payments must
nevertheless be included, in accordance with section 47 of that Act, in the estimates for the Land
Transportation Network Fund.
1991, c. 32, s. 262; 2010, c. 20, s. 49; 2010, c. 33, s. 34; 2011, c. 18, s. 289.
88.6. The sums which the Minister must pay shall be apportioned in proportion to the contributions
collected, since the preceding payment, in the territory of each metropolitan community and in each region
described in Schedule A, as well as in the territory of Ville de Saint-Jérôme.
Every public transit authority shall receive the whole part attributable to its region except the authorities
whose territories are situated within the territory of the Communauté métropolitaine de Québec which shall
share the part attributable to that territory.
The Government shall determine, by regulation, the criterion of apportionment of the part attributable to
the Communauté métropolitaine de Québec between the Société de transport de Québec and the Société de
transport de Lévis. Before submitting a draft regulation, the Minister shall consult the interested
municipalities and transit authorities.
The conditions of payment established under section 88.5 may provide for the successive use of
provisional and final data for the purposes of the apportionment based on the criterion prescribed by the
regulation and provide for adjustments as a result of a difference between provisional data and final data.
1991, c. 32, s. 262; 1995, c. 65, s. 144; 2001, c. 23, s. 241; 2002, c. 77, s. 77.
DIVISION IX.2
Repealed, 2016, c. 8, s. 117.
2010, c. 20, s. 50; 2012, c. 28, s. 194; 22001166,, cc.. 88, s. 1171.
88.7. (Repealed).
2010, c. 20, s. 50; 22016, c. 8, s. 117.
0
1
6
,
Updated to N1ovembecr 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pu.b1lisher T-12 / 42 of 48
8
TRANSPORT ACT
88.8. (Repealed).
2010, c. 20, s. 50; 2010, c. 33, s. 34; 2011, c. 18, s. 290; 2012, c. 28, s. 195.
88.9. (Repealed).
2010, c. 20, s. 50; 22016, c. 8, s. 117.
0
DIVISION IX1.3
6
INVESTMENT, IN SHARED TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE
c
2015, c. 17, s. 9. .
8
88.10. The Minister may, with the authorization of the Government and on the conditions it determines in
each case, enter into an agreement with the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec regarding the
management and carrying out of a project whose purpose is to develop a new shared transportation
infrastructure. The agreement must include mechanisms for integrating such a project into the relevant public
transit systems as well as a rate schedule for the shared transportation infrastructure, including indexation
mechanisms.
The Government shall define the needs and public interest objectives to be met with respect to the project
and shall authorize the solution to be implemented from among the various options proposed by the Caisse de
dépôt et placement du Québec.
Such a project, which the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec examines with full independence in
accordance with its constituting Act, must offer its depositors the potential for a commercial return on
investment, having regard to the risks apprehended. The evaluation of such a potential and the comparison
with market practices for similar situations must be validated by an independent expert selected by the parties
from a list prepared beforehand.
The Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec has full authority over any project that is the subject of an
agreement entered into under the first paragraph.
The Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec may set rates for the use of the shared transportation
infrastructure referred to in the first paragraph. At the time the agreement is signed, the Caisse de dépôt et
placement du Québec shall make public the rate schedule for the shared transportation infrastructure,
including the indexation mechanisms.
2015, c. 17, s. 9.
88.11. The shared transportation infrastructure referred to in section 88.10 is and remains appropriated to
public utility in whosever hands it may be.
Despite subparagraph 3 of the second paragraph of section 4 of the Act respecting expropriation (chapter
E-25), a municipality, metropolitan community, intermunicipal board, school service centre or school board
may not, without the Government’s authorization, acquire that shared transportation infrastructure by
expropriation.
2015, c. 17, s. 9; 22017, c. 17, s. 72;1 22020, c. 1, s. 305;1 22023, c. 27, s. 222.1
0 0 0
88.11.1. F1or the purposes2 of the constru2ction of a shared transportation infrastructure, the Caisse de dépôt
et placement d7u Québec or a0ny person it de3signates may exercise the powers provided for in section 9 of the
Act respecting, the Ministère ,des Transports ,(chapter M-28).
c c c
22017, c. 17, s. 73.1. . .
0 1 1 2
1 7 7
Updated to 1November 01 2024
7
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 43 of 48
,
c
.
1
7
TRANSPORT ACT
88.12. The Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec may not transfer, in whole or in part, its rights, titles
and interests in the land constituting the site of a shared transportation infrastructure described in section
88.10 before construction has been completed.
2015, c. 17, s. 9.
88.13. The terms and conditions governing the operation of the shared transportation infrastructure
stipulated in an agreement entered into under section 88.10 bind any subsequent purchaser.
2015, c. 17, s. 9.
88.14. Unless otherwise provided, the Act respecting the Autorité régionale de transport métropolitain
(chapter A-33.3), the Act respecting the Réseau de transport métropolitain (chapter R-25.01) and the Act
respecting public transit authorities (chapter S-30.01) do not apply to a shared transportation infrastructure
referred to in section 88.10.
2015, c. 17, s. 9; 22001166,, cc.. 88, s. 1181; 2 2017, c. 17, s. 741.
0
88.14.1. Despite any inc1onsistent provision, the Government may make this division applicable to a
project whose object is a n7ew shared transportation infrastructure of the Autorité régionale de transport
métropolitain, the Réseau de ,transport métropolitain, the Société de transport de Montréal and, as determined
by the Government, a municicpality or another public transit authority, provided the project satisfies the criteria
determined by the Conseil du. trésor under the second paragraph of section 16 of the Public Infrastructure Act
(chapter I-8.3). 1
7
22001166,, cc.. 88, s. 119.1
88.15. In this division, a reference to the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec is also a reference to a
wholly-owned subsidiary, within the meaning of the fifth paragraph of section 4 of the Act respecting the
Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec (chapter C-2), described in subparagraph a.1 of the first paragraph of
section 31 or in the third paragraph of section 32 of that Act.
2015, c. 17, s. 9; 2017, c. 17, s. 75.
DIVISION X
FINAL PROVISIONS
89. The ordinances passed and the decision taken by the Transportation Board under the Transportation
Board Act (Revised Statutes, 1964, chapter 228) continue to be in force until repealed or replaced by
regulation of the Government or by decision of the Commission within the jurisdiction assigned to each one
by this Act. Such ordinances and decisions, however, may be amended by regulation of the Government or by
decision of the Commission within the jurisdiction assigned to each one by this Act.
For the purposes of this section, the following orders may be revoked, replaced or changed by regulation of
the Government: General Order on Trucking (R.R.Q., 1981, chapter T-12, r. 2), General Order respecting the
transport of passengers and goods by water (R.R.Q., 1981 chapter T-12, r. 17), Order respecting permits for a
radius of 30 miles from Montréal, Saint-Jérôme and Valleyfield made on 12 September 1960, Order
respecting permits for a radius of 30 miles from the district of Greater Montréal, Joliette, Notre-Dame des
Prairies and Saint-Paul de Joliette made on 2 December 1971, and Special Order 7225 respecting Trois-
Rivières and the town of Bécancour, made on 22 February 1972. Sections 40 and 74 to 80 apply, adapted as
required, to any contravention of these orders.
Any other order may be revoked, replaced or changed by the Commission.
1972, c. 55, s. 167; 1975, c. 45, s. 24, s. 36; 1987, c. 97, s. 119.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 44 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
90. The Minister is responsible for the application of this Act.
1972, c. 55, s. 185; 1981, c. 8, s. 30.
91. (This section ceased to have effect on 17 April 1987).
1982, c. 21, s. 1; U. K., 1982, c. 11, Sch. B, Part I, s. 33.
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 45 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
SCHEDULE A
METROPOLITAN COMMUNITIES, MUNICIPALITIES AND INDIAN RESERVES IN THE TERRITORY
FOR WHICH A CONTRIBUTION OF MOTORISTS TO PUBLIC TRANSIT IS PAYABLE
1. Communauté métropolitaine de Montréal
2. Communauté métropolitaine de Québec
3. Gatineau region:
Ville de Gatineau
Municipalité de Cantley
Municipalité de Chelsea
4. Trois-Rivières region:
Ville de Trois-Rivières
Paroisse de Saint-Maurice
Wolinak Indian Reserve
5. Saguenay region:
Ville de Saguenay
Municipalité de Saint-Fulgence
Municipalité de Saint-Honoré
Canton de Tremblay
6. Sherbrooke region:
Updated to N1ovember 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 46 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
Ville de Sherbrooke
Municipalité d’Ascot Corner
Canton de Hatley
Paroisse de Saint-Denis-de-Brompton
Municipalité de Stoke
7. Ville de Saint-Jérôme
1991, c. 32, s. 263; 1992, c. 53, s. 16; 1993, c. 24, s. 7; 2001, c. 23, s. 242; 2001, c. 66, s. 69; 2002, c. 77, s. 78.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 47 of 48
TRANSPORT ACT
REPEAL SCHEDULES
In accordance with section 17 of the Act respecting the consolidation of the statutes (chapter R-3), chapter 55
of the statutes of 1972, in force on 31 December 1977, is repealed, except sections 126 to 144, 149 to 156,
subsections 2 to 4 of section 165 and sections 166, 168 to 174, 176 to 181 and 186, effective from the coming
into force of chapter T-12 of the Revised Statutes.
In accordance with section 17 of the Act respecting the consolidation of the statutes and regulations (chapter
R-3), sections 127 to 129, paragraphs b to d of section 130, sections 131 to 134, paragraphs b and c of section
135, sections 136 to 141, paragraphs b and c of section 142 and section 143 of chapter 55 of the statutes of
1972, in force on 1 November 1980, are repealed effective from the coming into force of the updating to 1
November 1980 of chapter T-12 of the Revised Statutes.
In accordance with section 17 of the Act respecting the consolidation of the statutes and regulations (chapter
R-3), section 144 of chapter 55 of the statutes of 1972, in force on 1 January 1984, is repealed effective from
the coming into force of the updating to 1 January 1984 of chapter T-12 of the Revised Statutes.
Updated to 1November 10 2024
© Québec O1fficial Pub1lisher T-12 / 48 of 48